GAME NAME:
Millennium Blades

DESIGNED BY:
D. Brad Talton Jr.
Lead Illustrator: Fabio Fontes
Colorist: Ana Garcia
Supporting Staff:
Joshua Van Laningham
Michael Robles
Christopher Smith
Samuel Tapper
Proofreading:
Bob Nolan, Joshua Van
Laningham, Members of the
Level 99 Games Playtesting Forums
Playtesters:
Ty Arnold, Kier Arnold, Bo King,
Trey Chambers, Peter Bemis, John Kirk,
Chris Smith, Michael Robles, Joshua
Van Laningham, Samuel Tapper, Reagan
McClellan, JR Honeycutt
Special Thanks:
Arcane Wonders, CGC Games, Jasco Games,
Kyy Games, Most Mondays Games, Black
Box Games, Portal Games, Jared Roswurm,
Miguel Duran, Arthur Tebbel, Michael Salt,
Chris Wilson, Yeh Fang, Salvador Bernad
Sala, Nicholas Baker, Josh Herreshoff,
Jared Ridinger, Benjamin Liu, Jonah Nan,
Cristophe Mouchel, Raymond Polacek,
Robert Campbell, Eric Brown, Simon To,
Anthony Gascon, Caleb Key, Wesley Taylor,
Bryan Emborsky, Steven Durst, Alex Johnson,
Jason Sherlock, Matthew Davison, Matt
Stevens, Cory Jones, Tanya Seward
... and all of our Backers on Kickstarter!

In a world very much like our own,
Millennium Blades is the world's most popular
collectible card game. Continuously in print
for more than a thousand years, the game has
seen countless expansions and untold billions
of cards in circulation.
Players from around the world and from all
walks of life seek to become world champions
by mastering duels and collecting the game's
rarest and most coveted cards. Still others
live by the game, building financial empires
by dealing, speculating, and trading in the
aftermarket. Many are content simply to play
for fun and meet new friends.
Your very own Millennium Blades Legend
is about to unfold! What will be your path to
glory? With your starter deck in hand and a
dream in your heart, the time has come to
step boldly into the world of Millennium
Blades!
We've all been touched by the magic of
collectible card games. When I was about
fourteen, a friend gave me my first Magic: the
Gathering Deck, and from that day, there was
no turning back. After spending countless
hours and dollars on the hobby and having
my gripes and disappointments along with
elations and inspirations, I've come to look
back fondly on those days. While I don't have
the time to collect and play that I used to, I
remember well the magic that brought these
games to life for me and my friends so many
years ago. I've tried my best to capture that
magic in Millennium Blades.
Millennium Blades is much different than
any game I've ever made, and it's likely to
be very different from anything you've ever
played. I hope that it captures the emotions
of playing a collectible card game: excitement,
desperation, discovery, hope, dread, and
camaraderie.
Most of all, I hope you have fun playing
Millennium Blades!

"Millennium Blades is adapted
from a game played thousands of
years ago by Celtic Druid-Kings. Except
that they dueled with real monsters
and spells and used them to fight
aliens from another dimension."

COMPONENTS:
- 5 Player Boards
- 2 Central Market Boards (Aftermarket, Store)
- 6 Starter Decks (9 cards each)
- 1 Core Set (118 cards)
- 11 Expansion Sets (12 cards each)
- 9 Premium Sets (12 cards each)
- 8 Master Sets (12 cards each)
- 4 Bronze Promo Sets (6 cards each)
- 3 Silver Promo Sets (6 cards each)
- 3 Gold Promo Sets (6 cards each)
- 6 Pro Player Card Sets (5 cards each)
- 6 Character Cards
- 36 Friendship Cards
- 2 Meta Card Sets (6 cards each)
- 10 Oversized Venue Cards
- 1 Punchsheet
- 800 Millennium Dollar Money Slips
- 80 Sticker Slips
- 1 VP Score Pad
- 15 Wooden Cube RP Trackers (5 colors)

Before your first game, you should
assemble the Millennium Dollars Money
Wads. To do this, form stacks of 5 copies
of identical bills. Take two stacks of 5, press
them together so the printed sides face
outward, and wrap them with one of the
appropriate strips of sticker paper from the
sticker sheet.
Using whole stacks of Millennium
Dollars brings to life the feeling of buying
and selling expensive collectible trading
cards on the aftermarket!
- Core Set
- 6 Starter Decks
- 6 Pro Player Card Sets
- 2 Meta Sets
- 9 Premium Sets
- 11 Expansion Sets
- 10 Promo Sets
- 8 Master Sets

SETUP:
1. Table Setup. Find a large table and set out
player boards for each of your players in the
game, then place the Store and Aftermarket
Mats in the middle of the table. Make sure that
each player has about 3-6 inches between his
area and the central boards, but not too much
more, as players will need to reach around the
table quite a bit and should be able to reach
both central boards easily.
2. Set Selection. Take the Core set, five
Expansion Sets, four Premium Sets, and three
Master Sets of your choice. Shuffle all thirteen
of these together to form the Store.
3. Set Aside Promos.* Choose two sets of
Bronze and Silver Promos, and one set of Gold
Promos, for a total of five sets. Place one of
each type of set in the Card Fusion Area, and
set the other two aside to use as Prize Support
later on.
4. Setup Metagame. Shuffle the 2 stacks of
Metagame Cards separately, then place them
into their slots on the Aftermarket Board.
5. Distribute Starting Items. Give each
player a starter deck, either randomly or of
their choice, 3 cards from the top of the store
deck, a Character Card**, either randomly or
of their choice, 3 Sell Markers of a color (4 if
there are only three players), and 6 Friendship
cards of their character.
6. Supplies. Set up a bank of Millennium
Dollars where players can reach them, but
where they won't accidentally be mixed in with
a player's own possessions.
*Backer Bonus Promo Rule. If you backed
Millennium Blades and have a Backer Card
in the game, you can start with that card in
your collection. If you do, each other player
gets a random card from that card's Set in their
collection.
** Playing without Characters. In your first
game, you may choose to leave out character
powers. In this case, players should still
pick a character, but ignore their character's
Deckbuilding and Tournament powers.
Each player gets the Character
Power Card and all Friendship
Cards for their chosen character.

Shuffle it all together to make the Store!
Choose sets to include in the game!\5
(Optional) Pre-Release Tournament
Deckbuilding Round 1
Tournament Round 1
Deckbuilding Round 2
Tournament Round 2
Deckbuilding Round 3 (if no Pre-Release)
Tournament Round 3 (if no Pre-Release)

GAME FLOW:
Starting the Game
If you're new to Millennium Blades,
we recommend starting out by playing a
Pre-Release Tournament.
The Pre-Release Tournament is an optional
tournament round that is played before the
game starts. This is primarily designed to give
new players an opportunity to learn how decks
are played, so that they can evaluate cards and
build decks during the Deckbuilding Phase.
If all of your players have played
Millennium Blades before, you can skip the
Pre-Release Tournament and move to the first
round of Deckbuilding.
Pre-Release Tournament
This tournament is just like a normal
tournament, except for a few slight changes.
1. There is no Deckbuilding Phase. Players
play with only their starter decks.
2. No Metagame is revealed during this
tournament, and character powers are not
used.
3. There are very few points awarded for
this tournament.
4. If you choose to do a pre-release
tournament, skip the third round of
deckbuilding and the third tournament later
on in the game, so that there are still only
three tournaments in the game.
Millennium Blades is played over a series
of rounds. Each round has two parts, a
Deckbuilding Phase and a Tournament Phase.
In the Deckbuilding Phase, you will receive
new cards, as well as being able to buy, sell,
trade, and collect. After a certain time limit
passes, this phase ends and a tournament will
begin.
In the Tournament Phase, you will play
the deck you've built and try to collect more
Ranking Points (RP) than the other players.
Players will gain Victory Points (VP) by
placing highly in the tournaments, collecting
valuable sets, helping out the other players,
and amassing wealth by dealing through the
game's Aftermarket.
At the end of the last round, whoever has
the most VPs is declared the winner of the
game!
These rules assume a 3-5 player group. For
the 2 player rules, check the Variants section on
page 14.

OVERVIEW:
"A card game is an equation. There
are trillions of combinations of cards
to construct a deck, and millions of
constructions operated by millions of
agents. But the system is a finite one,
and so it is ultimately solvable."
- "Power Creep" Proposal Document
Designer's Note
(On Mistakes and Mis-plays)
Even though Millennium Blades
seems like a game of calculation and full
information on the surface, it's actually a
game of mental dexterity and skill.
In many games of strategy, we allow
players to go back and correct a mistake or to
replay a card when they have miscalculated.
It is critical that you do not allow players
to correct their mistakes in Millennium
Blades.
Millennium Blades is about dividing
the limited resources of your brainpower
among a variety of tasks, and weighing
where to best invest this resource. There's
not enough time to do everything, and so
you've got to make decisions about where to
use your best cards and where to invest your
time and attention.
Making a critical mis-play, forgetting to
turn in a collection, or neglecting to include
a key card in your deck are mistakes just like
missing a shot in soccer or dropping a catch
in baseball you can't step back and correct
these things. Instead, renew your focus,
and resolve not to make the same mistake
next round. The game has been built so
that you don't have to play every move
perfectly to win the game, and you'll have a
better experience if you just move on from
mistakes, rather than trying to fix them.
Cards move quickly, and there are
many copies of each card floating
around. You're better off attempting
to sell or trade for a card another
player wants than to withhold it or
fuse it. They're probably going to get
it one way or another, after all.
A pack of Millennium Blades
cards actually comes with 15 cards.
The commons and uncommons
have been abstracted out of the
game as Deck Boxes. All Singles
you acquire are rare or better.

FIRST GAME SETUP:
For your first game of Millennium
Blades, we recommend these sets, and that
you play without Character Powers:
Expansion: Fists of Steel, Obari as Hell,
Rubber Ducky Maid Crusaders R, 1001
Nights, Gno-Man's Land.
Premium: Cards Magica, AD 2400,
Clockwork Empire, Pandora's Box Opened.
Master: Symphony of Destruction,
Galactic Caboose, 006 Plus One.
Fusion Promo: Legend of Final Badass,
Princess Blade, Elemental Dragon Lords.
Prize Support: Elemental Blades, Sealed
Vaults.

COLLECTIONS:
Building your collections is a necessary step in becoming the most
prestigious Millennium Blades player among your friends. You can build
collections during the Deckbuilding Phase. Collections you turn in will be
lost, so be careful about what you include!
Deck
You will have the opportunity to build your deck freely during the
Deckbuilding Phase, including any cards that you feel will be useful to
you. More cards will become available each round, increasing your options
and the number of potential decks you can construct.
Metagame
In competitive card gaming, the meta is always changing, and so you will
need to watch the metagame as you play.
Each round, the metagame will shift. The Metagame gives significant
bonuses if you can incorporate it into your deck. Don't ignore it!
Aftermarket
Seek out wealth or hard-to-find cards by dealing in the Aftermarket!
Unlike the Store, cards in the Aftermarket are bought and sold face-up,
so you know exactly what you're going to get.
You can interact directly with the Aftermarket, and the bank pays you
right away when you put cards on sale, not when other players buy them.
You can browse through the Aftermarket and buy cards by paying their
costs to the bank directly.
Store
Buying packs from your friendly local game store is the easiest way to get
new cards for your collection!
Cards in the Store are face-down, so you will only know what set they are
from when you buy them. Will this pack have the card you've been searching
for, or will it set you on the path of pursuing an unforeseen strategy?
Binder
The Binder is where you keep your cards that are not being used in your
deck or collections. You can also trade cards from your binder with other
players, in exchange for money, friendship, or other cards.
Store Board
Aftermarket Board
Your Personal Area
Card Fusion
The Millennium Blades Player Rewards Program allows you to recycle your
old, useless cards into shiny new promotional cards.
Card Fusion is costly to use (5 cards for Bronze, 7 for Silver, and 9 for
Gold), and the cards you spend on it cannot be recovered later. The advantage
of exceptionally powerful promotional cards is difficult to ignore, so try it
out! Like Master Grade Cards, Promo Cards work best when you build your
deck around them, so one or two is enough.

Singles are the key cards that make up your
deck. They are the power cards that make
everything work.
Singles vary in power and usefulness. Lower
power, more universal singles are found in the
Core Set, while very powerful and hard-to-use
singles are found the Master Sets.
Deck Boxes represent the engine of
your deck, and help to unify the theme and
capabilities of your deck.
One Deck Box can be included with your
deck. Usually this will give you a secondary
scoring option, which forms a foundation for
the cards you choose to include. If you don't
know where to start, look at the Deck Boxes
available to you and try to find cards that will
make one of them work exceptionally well.
Deck Boxes come in the core set, but
more powerful ones are generally found in
Expansions, Premium, and Master Sets!
Accessories are items that you can use to
protect or enhance your deck. Most accessories
are found in the Core Set, but several other
sets contain them as well.
1. Card Name - The name of the card.
2. Star Rating - Star Ratings range from
1-10, but usually just 1-8. They are used in
collecting and dueling.
3. Set - The logo of the set the card comes
from.
4. Element - There are 6 Elements, usually
used in triggering effects and building sets.*
5. Type - There are 6 Types, usually used in
triggering effects and building sets.*
6. Rarity - The rarity level of the card.
7. Effect Text - The effect of the card.
8. Flavor Text - Some cards have flavor text
in italics. This has no effect on gameplay.

ELEMENTS:
Fire
Air
Light
Water
Earth
Dark
Types
Animal
Myth
Construct
Citizen
Soldier
Mage
Rarities
Core
Expansion
Premium
Master
Bronze Promo*
Silver Promo*
Gold Promo*
* "Promo" refers to any rarity of Promo card.
* Accessories and Deck Boxes do not often
have Elements (4) or Types (5). Those that do
not have one of these symbols cannot be used as
part of a collection.
Some cards have multiple Types or Elements.

DECKBUILDING PHASE:
The Deckbuilding Phase is a real-time phase.
This means that once the phase begins, players
can take any actions they want, as much or as
little as they want, until time runs out.
Setup the Phase
1. All players should flip their player boards
to the Deckbuilding Side, and combine all
their cards together into the Binder Area.
2. Give each player 30 Millennium Dollars
of income.
3. Deal each player 6 cards from the top
of the Store Deck (without paying for them).
These are added to the players' binders facedown,
and cannot be looked at until time
starts.
4. Place the top 9 cards of the store facedown
into the Store Area, so there are 10 cards
showing (including the one on top of the Store)
5. Make sure each player has all of their Sell
Markers.
6. Discard any revealed Metagame cards
out of play. Reveal a new Elemental Metagame
Card.
7. Set a Timer for 7 minutes, and begin!
Build your Deck
The Deck Area can contain up to eight
singles, up to one Deck Box, and up to two
Accessories.
During a Tournament, you will typically
only play 6 cards, so use the extra two slots to
put in backup cards in case you need to change
strategy mid-tournament
You can take cards out of your deck to make
room for new ones just as easily by returning
them to your binder.
You may only have one copy of any card in
your deck!
Pro Tip: Stacking your deck's cards in the
order you plan to play them can save you a lot
of time in the tournament step!
Make your Collection
Your Collection is made up of 2-8 cards,
each having at least one matching symbol with
all the others, and each having a different star
rating than all the others.
At the end of the round, your Collection
will be returned to the box and you will be
awarded points.
You can only build one collection per
Deckbuilding Phase. Don't miss out on this
important opportunity to score victory points!
Your Personal Area
A collection of Dark Cards. The card on the
right could not be part of this collection, because
it doesn't match the element of the collection.
A collection of Soldier Cards. The card on
the right could not be part of this collection,
because it already has a 4-STAR card.
You can freely move cards around in your
personal area in order to sort them for use in
your Deck or Collection, or to be saved for
later in your binder. You can move cards as
often as you want, and separate them in any
ways you like.
The only thing that is important is that at
the end of the timer, you know which cards are
in your deck for the tournament, which are in
your collection, to be returned to the box for
points, and which cards are in your binder, to
be saved for later use.
DECKBUILDING ACTIONS:
While the timer runs, players may begin
taking any of the following actions, as quickly
and as often as they wish:
1. Build your Deck.
2. Make a Collection.
3. Buy a Pack from the Store.
4. Fuse cards from your hand to obtain a
Promo.
5. Sell a card to the Aftermarket.
6. Buy a card from the Aftermarket.
7. Trade with other players.
Setting your Priorities
There are a lot of things to do in the limited
Deckbuilding Time. Here's a list of things in the
order they will score you Victory Points, so you
can prioritize your time.
Build Your Deck - Winning Tournaments
provides more Victory Points than any other
source.
Make Your Collection - Collections provide
a significant number of points, and you can turn
in one per Deckbuilding Phase.
Help Friends - Friendship Points are valuable,
and you can earn them by helping friends.
Amass Wealth - Millennium Dollars are
worth 1 VP per 4 dollars at the end of the
game. Try to sell cards that other players will buy
to keep your personal wealth increasing.
Discards
During tournaments, discarded cards go
to your binder, and you still own them.
Cards that are discarded "to the Store
Discard" may reappear later on during the
game.
Cards that are discarded "to the Box" or
"removed from the game" are placed back
into the game box and will never come back
into play.9
Buy a Pack from the Store
Experience the thrill of blind packs! Buy new
cards without knowing what you're going to get!
Pay Millennium Dollars equal to the buy
cost (the number in its top right) of any facedown
card you want (including the top of the
Store) to the bank, then take that card from
the store area and place it in the binder area of
your board.
Replenish the store area by dealing a card
from the top of the Store into the center of the
table face-down. If the Store runs out of cards,
shuffle the store discard together to form a
new deck.
Card Fusion
Convert unwanted junk cards into powerful
promotional cards.
Choose to do a Bronze, Silver, or Gold Card
Fusion. Select the appropriate number of
cards from your binder (5-Bronze, 7-Silver, or
9-Gold) and place them in the box. Then take
a card from the appropriate pile in the Card
Fusion Area. Place one of your Sell Markers
on the pile.
You cannot perform more than one Card
Fusion of each type per round, and you cannot
perform Card Fusions if you have no Sell
Markers left.
The Store
Sell to the Aftermarket
Place any card from your binder and one of
your Sell Markers into a slot in the Aftermarket.
Then take Millennium Dollars equal to
that card's Star Rating from the bank. The
Aftermarket has no card limit in this phase.
If you have no Sell Markers (because they
are already in the Aftermarket or were used for
Card Fusion), you cannot sell more cards.
The Aftermarket stops accepting cards
for sale in the final 6-minutes before the
tournament. This is to ensure that everyone
has adequate time to buy cards.
Once your card is on sale in the Aftermarket,
you cannot buy it back or remove it from sale!
Buy from the Aftermarket
Choose a card from the Aftermarket with
another players' Sell Marker on it and pay
Millennium Dollars equal to that card's Star
Rating into the bank. Return the Sell Marker
on the card to its owner.
Add your new card to your binder.
The Aftermarket
Trade with Players
You can always Trade with other players
directly, without using the Aftermarket.
However, any trades made between players
must be equal value trades. That is, the total
of all Star Ratings and Millennium Dollars
must be equal on both sides of the trade.
If you are making a trade that clearly benefits
one side more than the other, you may wish to
ask the other side for Friendship in addition
to the other trade items.
Friendship Cards are worth extra Victory
Points at the end of the game. You can't score
them yourself, but you can give them to
another player who helps you out with a good
trade or a rare card. You may not score more
than 6 VP from a single player's Friendship
Cards.
Your Friends
The 5 Fusion Cards are returned to the
box and a Bronze Promo Card is acquired
from the top of its Promo Deck.
Deques really needs Cardine's
promotional Soul Caliper card for
a combo in his deck, but they both
know it's more valuable than an even
trade. Since agreeing to make this
trade is really a favor from Cardine
to Deques, Deques offers a Friendship
Card in addition to the even trade.
If Fulton wants Morrey's Evil Helbane
card, he's got to match its value with
money and cards of his own.

Selling James Bomb to the Aftermarket would
get you seven dollars right away from the
bank. Anyone who wants to buy him later
would pay that same amount into the bank.
Fulton decides to buy a 5-cost Clockwork Empire
card. He pays 5 Millennium Dollars to the
bank, then adds the card to his Binder. Now
he can flip it over and find out what it is!

WHEN TIME RUNS OUT:
After the first 7-minute timer expires, deal each player 6 more cards from the store deck, then reveal the top card of the Type Meta stack.
Set another 7-minute timer. After this timer expires, the Aftermarket stops accepting newcards for sale
(players may still buy cards, but they cannot sell them anymore), and setanother 6-minute timer.
After the final 6-minute timer expires, the Deckbuilding Phase ends, and the tournament begins.
The whole thing looks sort of like this...
Get new cards and cash!

Timers in Millennium Blades are relaxed.
If you see a player scrambling to finish
something they started, all players can agree
to offer a short grace period by starting a new
3-minute timer.
If a player has not even started on an
endeavor (ex: "Oh man, I totally forgot to make
a collection!") it's probably best to just move on
to ending the phase.
End of Deckbuilding
When the final 6-minute timer sounds, the
round ends. Follow these steps to clean up and
get ready for the tournament...
1. In any order, players should each turn in a
maximum of one collection for Victory Points.
2. All loose cards that are not part of a
player's deck are moved to their owners'
binders.
3. Put all cards from the store and the
Aftermarket into the Store Discard Pile.
Scoring Collections
When a collection is scored, place it in the
box and award Victory Points based on the
size of the collection.

"This card press is the anvil upon
which we will forge the blades
for a new generation of heroes!"
- Shamans of the Midwest CEO

"What do I play? Ha! I don't play
card games. I play markets. Stocks.
Commodities. Where you may see an
9-Star Exaltius the Untenable, I see a
emergent market, ripe for speculation."
- Fulton Suitcase, in an interview for
Top Tier, Top Dollar Magazine

PERSONAL SPACE & ETIQUETTE:
You should never touch cards on
another player's player board.
When a player reveals a new card from
the Store, that player has the first chance
to buy that card, if he or she wishes.
If two players both want to buy the same card
from the Store or Aftermarket, give priority
to the player with fewer Victory Points.
It's fine to stop the timer for a moment,
if a player asks for a rules explanation
or needs something clarified.

"A card game is a form of personal
expression. You take what you
believe about the worldeverything
you want to say and everything you
want to proveand you build it into
a deck, and then you put your world
view into direct competition with your
opponent. And at the end of the game,
you know exactly who is right."
- Deques Applenti

TOURNAMENT PHASE:
The Tournament Phase is a turn-based
phase. Players will take turns in clockwise
order around the table, each making a single
turn. The tournament ends when no players
are able to take any more turns.
Setup the Phase
1. All players should flip their player boards
to the Tournament Side. They should set their
binder cards off to the side of the play area, and
take the cards in their decks into their hands.
2. Each player should set their current
RP to zero.
3. Each player should set out their
Accessories and Deck Box onto the allotted
spaces on the tournament board. All Singles
remain in your hand.
4. Turns begin with whichever player
placed highest in the previous tournament (or
whoever most recently opened a booster pack in
real life, in case of a tie or the first game round)
and proceeds clockwise.
Ranking Points
Most cards give you Ranking Points (RP) or
disrupt your opponents as they try to score RP.
At the end of the tournament, your placement
is determined by your total RP.
Top Card
The right-most face-up card on a player's
play area is called the Top Card. This card is
used for clashes (explained on the next page),
and also activates its Top effects.
If there are face-down cards on the right
edge of your tableau, your Top Card is the
face-up card closest to the right edge.
Deck Box Area
There is a slot reserved on the Tournament Board for your Deck Box. It
starts face-up in play. A card cannot affect or target your Deck Box unless it
specifically says it can.
Tableau
Singles you play during the tournament will be placed into these slots,
called the Tableau. Always place singles in the left-most available slot in this
area.
Accessories
There are two slots reserved for your accessories on the Tournament
Board. Both of your Accessories start face-up in play. A card cannot affect or
target your Accessories unless it specifically says it can.
Your Tournament Area

TOURNAMENT TURNS:
On a player's turn, he or she may take one
Action and must play one Single, in either
order. If the player is unable to play a Single,
they cannot take an Action, and instead Passes.
A player will be unable to play a single if he
or she has no cards in hand, or if his or her
entire tableau is filled already. Once all players
pass in succession, the tournament ends.
Use an Action (Optional)
Actions usually show up on Accessories, but
any card might have one. Actions are always
denoted by the "Action:" keyword. To use an
action, perform the text on the card, then flip
the card face-down. You can use one action
per turn, either before or after playing a Single.
Play a Single (Required)
On your turn, you must play a Single if you
are able. Place the Single face-up in the next
open left-most slot of your singles area.
Because her right-most card has been flipped
down, El Vice is now Shur's Top Card. If all her
cards are face-down, she has no Top Card.
The Ranking Points Track
simulates your performance over
a multi-round tournament.
Illegal Decks
It's possible that players may accidentally
bring more cards than they are allowed
to the tournament. Randomly remove
cards from the player's deck to their binder
until it is below the 8-card limit.
Face-Down Cards
Face Down cards have no STAR RATING,
ELEMENT, or TYPE. They still count as cards
(ex: gain 5 for each card to the left of this
one), but do not have any text or attributes.

CLASHING:
Many cards in the game will instruct you to
clash with an opponent, or with all players. If
clashing with another player, choose a player
with a Top Card. In a multi-player Clash, each
player who has a Top Card is able to participate
in the Clash.
Each player in the clash reveals the top card
of the Store (starting with whoever initiated
the clash and moving clockwise) add the Star
Rating of the card revealed in the clash and
the Star Rating of your Top Card. If one player
has a higher total than any other player, that
player is the winner, and all other players are
the losers. If there is a tie for the highest total,
then the clash is a tie.
Put all cards revealed this way into the
Aftermarket. If there is no space left (max.
12), discard all cards in the Aftermarket to the
Store Discard before adding any new cards.
In a tie, neither player wins nor loses. If a
clash does not have at least two participants
(due to not having Top Cards), then the clash
does not occur.
General Rules
A few effects show up frequently on cards.
These are explained here.
Discard a Card - The card is discarded to
the owner's Binder (unless another location is
specified). Cards discarded to the binder are
unavailable for the rest of the tournament.
Reveal a Card from your hand - The card
is shown from your hand to all players, then
returned to your hand.
Reveal a Face-down card - The card is
picked up and shown to all players, then placed
face-down again in the same slot.
Flip a Card - Flipped cards are turned facedown.
While a card is face-down, it has no
attributes (Star Rating, Rarity, Element, Type,
Set, etc), and is considered a blank card for all
purposes. "Flip a Card" does not allow you to
flip cards face-up, and you must choose a faceup
card to flip down when selecting a target
for these effects.
In general, effects cannot target face-down
cards, unless they specifically say otherwise.
Cannot be flipped - If you have cards that
are protected from flipping, you cannot choose
one of those cards when an opponent forces
you to choose and flip one of your cards.
Example: Shur must "flip her highest card".
Since her highest card is protected by Orella
(adjacent cards cannot be flipped by opponents'
effects), there are no legal targets for the effect,
and she can ignore it.
If she were instructed to "flip a card of her
choice", she would have to choose Orella, since
the other two cards cannot be flipped and are
thus not legal choices.
Example: Deques uses his Salamander,
Volcanic Lizard (flipping it down) to trigger a
clash with Cardine, using his Top Card: Knight
Captain Malcombe (10). Her Top Card is Evil
Beethoven (8). Deques reveals the top card
of the Store and it's a 3. Cardine reveals a 6.
Deques' total is 13 and Cardine's is 14, so she
wins the clash.
They put both of the cards revealed in the
clash into the Aftermarket Area, to be available
for sale during the next round.
Effects on Cards
Each kind of card may have different effects.
These effects fall into a few broad categories,
and follow the same notation as Actions, but
with different timing words on them.
Play - Play effects are activated right away
when a card comes into play. Perform the Play
Effect on the card when you play it from your
hand. Cards with Play effects are considered
"in play" for the purposes of effects when their
effect is resolving.
Next - Next effects trigger on the next card
you play, no matter whose turn it is or what
slot in your tableau you play it to.
Flip - Flip effects are activated when a card
is flipped face-down.
Ongoing - Ongoing effects keep on working
continuously as long as the card is face-up in
your tableau.
Top - Top effects work as long as the card
with the Top effect is the right-most face-up
card in your tableau. If other cards get flipped
down or if you can rearrange cards, you can
keep your best Top effects for multiple rounds.
Top Effects can also affect your opponents
quite often, and are good for disruption.
Score - Score effects are activated during
the end of the tournament, and usually let you
score additional Ranking Points. Activate all
of the Score effects (of face-up cards) in your
tableau (going left to right), then your Deck
Boxes, then Accessories, then the Metagames.
Since Score effects primarily just earn you
points, activation order rarely matters.
Reaction - Reaction effects are activated
whenever the relevant condition on the effect
is met. When you activate a Reaction, the
card that triggers it is flipped face-down. You
always have the option of not using your own
Reaction Effects, just like with Actions.
Besides Reactions, other Effects are Not
Optional, and must be used at the correct time.
Top>Ongoing>Play>Next>Score is the
order of what effects take priority over other
effects. The player whose turn it is gets the first
opportunity to use Flip or Reaction effects, with
that opportunity passing clockwise.

ENDING THE TOURNAMENT:
The tournament ends when all players are
unable to take further turns.
1. Each player should activate all Score
effects of face-up cards, starting with Singles
in your tableau, then the Deck Box, then
Accessories, and finally the Metagame Cards.
Every Player activates the Metagame Score
effects for themselves.
2. Award VP for each player based
on the Tournament VP chart for your
current round (regardless of your total
number of players). Players place in the
tournament according to the number of
Ranking Points (RP) they've accumulated.
If two or more players tie, add up and divide
between them the VP for all places they
would win. (Example: in a 3-way tie for second,
add up and divide evenly the points for second,
third, and fourth place, rounded down). Keep
track of VP on the score sheet.
3. Reveal a complete set of Promo Cards,
based on the Prize Support column of the
Tournament VP Chart. Players get one of
these randomly.
4. If this is the first or second round, place
all cards into their owners' binders, then flip
over all play mats to return to the Deckbuilding
Side. Return all players' Sell Markers to them.
5. If it is round three, proceed to final
scoring.
Round 1st Place 2nd Place 3rd Place 4th Place 5th Place Prize Support
Pre-Release 7 5 4 3 2 None
Round 1 21 15 12 9 6 Bronze
Round 2 28 20 16 12 8 Silver
Final Round 42 30 24 18 12 None (Game End)
Game End
When the game ends, players should total
up all of their Victory Points ( VP) and
see who is the Ultimate Millennium Blades
Champion.
Total up these points:
1. Tournament VPs for each round.
2. Collection VPs for each round.
3. Remaining Money VPs, at a rate of
4 Millennium Dollars to 1 VP, rounding
down.
4. Friendship Card VPs collected from
other players.
The player who has the most VP is declared
the winner!
In case of a tie, the winner is whoever had
the most VP from tournaments. If the game
is still a tie, then whoever had the most VP
from Collections, followed by Money and then
Friendship breaking ties in that order.
Set Specific Keywords
Many sets use special Keywords to describe
their effects. When you see a keyword, its
effects are always the same. On most cards, the
keyword's full text is printed out.
Mimicry - A card with Mimicry has the
Element and Type symbols of a face-up card to
its immediate left instead of its own. This effect
ends if the card to its left is flipped. This effect
continues to work during scoring.
Blast Off - Action: You may flip this card to
put 3 +1 STAR tokens on the next card you
play. +1 STAR tokens increase a card's Star
Rating by 1 each. Blast Off also has a PLUS
variation that adds even more +1 STAR
tokens!
Scurry - Play: You may insert this card
anywhere into your tableau. When you do
this, you will shift some of your cards to the
right to make room.
Anvil Drop - Action: Flip a card in another
player's tableau with a lower than this card.
Thwomp! - Play: If the card to the left has a
lower than this one, flip it and gain .
Tournament VP Chart
Infinite Loops
Infinite Loops are very rare, but theoretically
possible. If you manage to cause an Infinite
Loop (a set of mandatory effects that cannot
be stopped), you are immediately removed
from the tournament, but you score
VP as though you had won first place (this
doesn't prevent another player from actually
winning first place through normal means).
After this, all your tournament cards (hand,
tableau, box, and accessories) are returned
to the box, and you gain Millennium Dollars
equal to their total sell value. You do not gain
Millennium Dollars if it is the last round.
"Shouting your card names
triumphantly as you slam them down
into your tableau makes them even
more powerful and intimidating."
Aftermarket Space
Remember that the Aftermarket works
differently depending on the phase. During
Deckbuilding there is no limit to the
number of cards that can be in it. During
Tournaments, the Aftermarket has a limit
of 12 cards. If a card or cards would be
placed in the Aftermarket and cause it to
go over this limit, discard all cards in the
Aftermarket to the store discard, then place
the new card or cards in the Aftermarket.

VARIANTS & OPTIONS:
Want more Millennium Blades? This
section gives players who are experienced
with the game a ton of new ways to change the
experience and replay Millennium Blades!
Turn-Based Mode
You can play Millennium Blades as a turnbased
game as well by following these rules.
In turn based mode, there is only one phase,
which is a combination of both tournament
and deckbuilding phases. This mode can be
played by 2-5 players. Friendship is not used
in this mode.
1. Setup the store deck as usual.
2. Determine who will be first player, and
deal each player 7 cards. Each player gains
30 Millennium Dollars, and has a maximum
one immediately from the same pile.
6. Draw a new hand of 6 cards, gain 30 more
Millennium Dollars, and retrieve any used Sell
Markers.
7. If this is your first time scoring, gain a
random silver promo from out of play. If this is
your second time scoring, gain a random Gold
Promo instead.
Now you're able to start working on your
second deck. After a player scores for the third
time, he is out of the game.
After all players have scored three times,
total up their RP across all three rounds.
This total score is your score for the game.
The highest total RP wins!
Duel Mode
Duel mode is a 2 player variant for
Millennium Blades. It is played over 3 rounds.
The winner is determined by who wins best 2
out of 3 tournaments.
Mode Differences:
All rules and actions in this mode are the
same as in normal rules, unless otherwise
stated.
Friendship is not used in this mode.
Each player may form two collections
during the Deckbuilding Phase: one Elemental
collection and one Type collection. Instead of
gaining VP from them, these are converted
to RP and are added to your total RP at
the end of the Tournament Phase at a rate of
10 RP per card.
Additionally, each player has 6 Sell Markers
to use in this mode (use two different kinds of
Sell Markers for this). Trading is available to
players, but trades must still be even.
The first player to win two tournaments is
declared the winner of the game!
hand size of 7 cards.
3. Reveal both metas at the game start.
4. Choose two Bronze Promo Sets and one
Silver Promo Set to be fusable during the game.
Gold Promos are not fusable in this mode.
5. Choose one Silver Promo Set and one
Gold Promo Set to be given out during scoring
and set these aside.
On a player's turn, he must perform exactly
one of these actions:
1. Buy a card from the store or from the
Aftermarket (he must have fewer than 7 cards
to do this).
2. Sell a card to the Aftermarket (if he has
sell markers remaining).
3. Fuse cards from his hand into a promo
using normal card fusion rules. Since your
hand size is 7, Gold Promos are not available
to fuse in this mode.
4. Add a card from his hand to a collection.
The collection's type/element is declared at the
moment you add the first card to it. You may
have two collections at a timeone based on
element, and another based on type.
5. Play a card from his hand into his tableau,
or as a deck box or accessory, following all
rules as in a tournament.
6. Score his tableau and collection.
As in a normal game, players can use
"Action:" effects before or after doing their main
action for the turn.
Scoring is the only new action available to
players in this mode. To Score, follow these
steps:
1. Activate all Score effects on cards in your
tableau, in the meta, and on your Accessories
and Deck Box.
2. Gain 10 RP for each card in your
collections.
3. Record your final RP on a score sheet
or other device, then reduce your RP back
to zero.
4. Discard your tableau, deck box, hand and
collection to the store discard. You may choose
to discard or keep your accessories.
5. Choose and place one of the Metas onto
the bottom of the deck. Replace it with a new
Character Powers
There are six main characters in Millennium
Blades, and you can take on their personas to
specialize your play style.
To use characters, just bring in the relevant
character cards. Each card has two sides, a
Deckbuilding side and a Tournament side,
giving you new powers during each phase.
Familiarize yourself with both sides before
the game begins, and show the relevant side
during each phase.

Pro Player Cards
When playing with characters, you can
introduce Pro Player Cards. Pro Player cards
have their own Type.
During rounds 1 and 2, when a player scores
first place in the tournament, give each player
(including himself) a copy of his Pro Player
Card.
If a player who won the first tournament
also wins the second one, give the 2nd place
player's Pro Player card to all players instead.
Venues
There's no need to play in the same game
store every week! Why not go to the museum,
or play on the edge of an active volcano?
Shuffle together the Venue Deck and place
it beside the Metagames. When you start the
Deckbuilding Round, also reveal the top card
of the Venue Deck. It will have rules to follow
for the Deckbuilding Phase, Tournament Phase
or both. Discard it when the tournament ends.
Millennium Accessories
The Millennium Accessories are the world's
most powerful accessories, wreathed in legend.
If you are playing with a less-experienced
player, you can give that player a random
Millennium Accessory as a handicap.
Alternatively, if all players are equally
experienced, and want to raise the power curve
of the game, they can draft the Millennium
Accessories at the game start.
Draft Mode
Draft Mode is an optional rule for advanced
players who want more control over the cards
they receive each round.
Draft Mode replaces the random cards at the
start of the Deckbuilding Phase (Deckbuilding
Setup, Step 3).
When Deckbuilding begins, deal each
player 6 cards from the Store. Players then
draft these cards, going clockwise until each
player has claimed six cards (take one card
from your set of 6, then pass the rest to the
player on your left).
After the first 7-minute timer ends, repeat
this process, this time passing cards counterclockwise.
Liquidation Mode
Liquidation Mode is an optional rule for
advanced players who want to see a lot more
variety in decks.
During set up, put 2 additional Expansion,
Premium, and Master sets into your store
deck. At the end of each tournament round
except the last, players return all the cards in
their decks to the box (including deck boxes
and accessories), and receive Millennium
Dollars equal to the combined Star Ratings of
all the cards liquidated in this way.
When playing in Liquidation Mode, money
only provides half as many VPs (1 VP
per 8 Millennium Dollars).
Free Market Mode
Free Market Mode is an optional rule for
advanced players who are very confident in
their card evaluation abilities.
With Free Market Mode, players may make
uneven trades. That is, both sides of a trade do
not need to match up in terms of Millennium
Dollars and Star Ratings.
Though it seems like a simple change,
this mode gives veteran players a massive
advantage over less experienced players, so be
careful when using this optional rule.
"When I build a new deck, it's
like writing a new song. I have
all these different pieces that are
meaningless on their own, but then
you arrange them together and
add a big idea, and you've created
something unique and awesome.
- Deques Applenti, in an interview
for Pure Deck Designer Magazine

Deques Applenti
USA, 19, Musician (Drummer)
Specialty: Deckbuilding
Why he plays: For expression
Cardine Kolleckta
Russia, 15, Artist
Specialty: Collecting
Why she plays: For discovery
Fulton Suitcase
Norway, 37, Investment Banker
Specialty: Buying
Why he plays: For profit
Character Intros
Deques is the drummer for an American
Indie Band, Heart of the Decks, who creates
epic music to duel by during tournaments.
He's well-known in the Millennium Blades
scene for his unique and often bizarre
deck concepts which have swept aside the
tournament meta and turned the game on its
head more than once. When he's not touring
with his bandmates you can usually find
Deques at his apartment on a Friday Night,
hosting a draft tournament party with about
twenty friends from the local store scene.
Deques specializes in building unique
concept decks. He can include extra deck
boxes and accessories in his tournament kit,
giving him additional scoring and defense
options during the game. These options
allow him to safely play decks which would
normally be very vulnerable to disruption,
and to score them in multiple ways. His
ability to play decks that would be impossible
for other characters to pull off makes him an
especially interesting character.
An art student in Russia, Cardine has
achieved fame among the international
Millennium Blades community for her
custom-painted cards and for sculpture
integrating cards. Her work has been featured
on a number of promotional cards in the
game, and she is always on the lookout for
rare gems scrounged from attics, thrift shops,
and estate sales.
Cardine is a balanced character who starts
the game with extra advantages in the form of
some rare promo cards and who can acquire
rare cards from card fusion more easily
than other players. These rare cards form a
strong core to Cardine's deck, giving her an
advantage over slower players in the early
rounds of the game. During tournaments,
she can re-score some of her cards, doubling
down on the most effective plays in her
arsenal.
An investment banker by trade, Fulton has
recently taken to speculating on the futures of
cards in the Millennium Blades Aftermarket.
His considerable personal wealth allows him
to buy and sell large quantities of identical
singles, effectively controlling the price
of specific cards. Fulton enjoys the game
itself, but he plays primarily to understand
the value of the cards and to inform his
investments. Getting close to the action by
playing in the pro tour gives him an edge
against other investors when speculating on
what next season's chase cards will be.
Fulton's abilities primarily shine during
the deckbuilding phase, where he receives
extra money and is able to peek at store cards
before buying them. This helps him maximize
the returns on what he purchases from the
store and create a better deck more quickly
than other players. During gameplay, he
can use leftover money to boost the value of
his cards, giving him an edge in clashes and
during scoring.
Morrey Caardmaan
France, 44, Game Store Chain Owner
Specialty: Selling
Why he plays: For business
The Power Creep
Portugal, 1, Research Project
Specialty: Metagame Control
Why it plays: For research
Shur Wen Na
China, 22, Fashion Model
Specialty: Dueling
Why she plays: For fame
Character Intros
Hailing from France, Morrey is the
founder and owner of Revanche ("Rematch"
in America and the UK), the world's largest
store chain dealing in tabletop games and
accessories. Though his success in business
lets him live the high society life of the rich
and famous, he still keeps up with the games
he sells and can be found regularly in his
own stores playing casually. While he doesn't
compete in his own stores' tournaments, he
often sponsors pro teams or plays in the pro
tour himself to promote Revanche.
Morrey specializes in controlling the
Aftermarket during deckbuilding, with the
ability to buy cards more cheaply and sell
them at a higher price than the other players.
The extra cash this generates gives him an
edge when making deals to get the cards he
needs for his deck. During tournaments,
Morrey can use cards from the store deck to
boost his own deck, and can manipulate the
store deck to gain an edge when clashing with
opponents.
In the world of Millennium Blades,
Portugal is one of the world's major
technology centers. Scientists at the
Universidade de Tecnologias Ludicas
developed the Power Creep project to apply
high-level artificial intelligence to collectible
card games. Players all around the world
can deck-test against Power Creep online
via the cloud. The data that is collected from
this testing is distilled down into a central
database, which is brought to tournaments
to compete against the most skilled human
opponents.
Due to the vast reach of the deck-testing
cloud platform, Power Creep has the ability
to control the Metagame, manipulating what
types and elements will perform best in
upcoming tournaments. By playing heavily
to the current metagame, Power Creep can
score massive points, though this can make
his decks easier to disrupt for players who are
playing specifically to counter the meta.
Shur is the Chinese national champion
of Millennium Blades, and a celebrity in
her own right. In addition to numerous
commercial and fashion magazine
appearances, she's a well-known cosplayer
and pro-tour circuit player who has her sights
set on becoming the World Champion of
Millennium Blades. Shur plays to win, and
is a cutthroat duelist who doesn't pull any
punches. Her confrontational personality
makes her satisfying to win as and against.
Shur's deck-building ability is somewhat
weak, and she focuses heavily on the
tournament phase, where her ability to win
duels gives her an edge on other players.
She gets to play extra cards into her tableau,
meaning that she can build more powerful
combo decks than any other character,
and can delay playing her power cards or
disruption cards until others have already
dropped out of the running.

FAQ:
Level 99 Games
Q: What Star Value do face-down cards have?
A: Face-down cards have no Star Value and cannot
gain Tokens or through any means.
Q: Can a copy effect (Like Yellow Egg's) be copied?
Can a copy effect copy a face down card?
A: Copy effects can never be copied. The card in
question will usually indicate this. A copy effect that
would target a face-down card does nothing, and the card
remains in its original state.
Q: If I am required to flip a card of my choice, can
I choose a card that cannot be flipped?
A: No, a card that cannot be flipped is not a legal
target for a flip effect.
Q: If a card makes me lose RP and I don't have
enough to lose, what happens?
A: You lose as much as you can and stop at zero.
Effects that trigger based on losing a specific amount of
RP still happen even if no RP is lost.
Q: If I gain an extra slot in my tableau, where is it?
A: Any extra tableau slots are always at the rightmost
side of your tableau unless otherwise stated on the card.
Q: What happens if the Store runs out of cards?
A: Shuffle the Store Discard to form a new Store Deck.
Any promo cards that come up in the store can be bought
for cash instead of via fusion.
Q: What happens if the Aftermarket spaces are
filled during the Deckbuilding Phase?
A: The Aftermarket has no space limit during the
Deckbuilding Phase, only during the Tournament Phase.
Q: How do I tell how many of a card are in a set?
A: The highest star card in the set has one copy while
the lowest has three. Any other card in the set has two
copies. In promo sets, there is one copy of every card. Core
Set is an exception to the above rules.
Q: What happens if I have multiple reaction effects
trigger at the same time?
A: You resolve all reaction effects you control in any
order you wish. If an opponent has an effect that triggers
at the same time yours does, the player whose turn it is
has priority, followed by the other players with effects in
turn order.
Q: How do attached cards function?
A: Attached cards are not considered in the tableau for
effects. If a card that has an attachment becomes flipped,
the attached card is put back in your binder.
Q: Do Tokens count for Token effects?
A: Yes. A Token is the same as three Tokens.

INDEX:
Accessories 7
Aftermarket Board 6
Aftermarket Space 13
Anvil Drop 13
Blast Off 13
Build Your Deck 8
Buy a Pack from the Store 9
Buy from the Aftermarket 9
Cannot be Flipped 12
Card Data 7
Card Fusion 9
Cardine Kolleckta 16
Character Intros 16-17
Character Powers 14
Clashing 12
Components 3
Credits 2
Deck Boxes 7
Deckbuilding Actions 8
Deckbuilding Phase 8
Deques Applenti 16
Designer's Forward 2
Designer's Note (Mistakes) 5
Discard a Card 12
Discards 8
Draft Mode 15
Duel Mode 14
Effects on Cards 12
Elements 7
Ending the Tournament 13
End of Deckbuilding 10
Face Down Cards 11
FAQs 20
First Game Setup 5
Flip 12
Flip a Card 12
Free Market Mode 15
Fulton Suitcase 16
Game End 13
Game Flow 5
Game Setup 4
General Rules 12
Infinite Loops 13
Level 99 Games 20
Liquidation Mode 15
Make your Collection 8
Millennium Accessories 15
Mimicry 13
Morrey Caardmaan 17
Next 12
Ongoing 12
Overview 5
Personal Area 6
Personal Space & Etiquette 10
Play 12
Play a Single 11
Power Creep 17
Pre-Release Tournament 5
Priority Order 12
Pro Player Cards 15
Ranking Points 11
Rarities 7
Reaction 12
Reveal a Card from your Hand 12
Reveal a face-down card 12
Score 12
Scoring Collections 10
Scurry 13
Sell to the Aftermarket 9
Set Breakdown 3
Set Breakdown 18-19
Set Specific Keywords 13
Setting your Priorities 8
Setup the Phase 11
Shur Wen Na 17
Singles 7
Starting the Game 5
Store Board 6
Story So Far 2
Thwomp! 13
Top 12
Top Card 11
Tournament Area 11
Tournament Phase 11
Tournament Turns 11
Tournament VP Chart 13
Trade with Players 9
Turn-Based Mode 14
Types 7
Use an Action 11
Variants & Options 14
Venues 15
When time runs out 10
Your Personal Area 8
Want even more games? Check out our
website at www.level99games.com and check
out our other exciting games!

GAME NAME:
Pandemic

DESIGNED BY:
Matt Leacock
Do you have what it takes to save humanity? As skilled members of a disease-fighting team, you must keep
four deadly diseases at bay while discovering their cures.
You and your teammates will travel across the globe, treating infections while finding resources for cures.
You must work together, using your individual strengths, to succeed. The clock is ticking as outbreaks and
epidemics fuel the spreading plagues.
Can you find all four cures in time? The fate of humanity is in your hands!

COMPONENTS:
- 7 Role cards 59 Player cards
- (48 City cards, 6 Epidemic cards, 5 Event cards)
- 96 Disease cubes
- 24 in 4 colors 4 Cure markers
- 4 Reference cards
- 1 Board
- 1 Infection rate
marker
- 1 Outbreaks marker
- 6 Research stations

OVERVIEW:
In Pandemic, you and your fellow players are members of a disease control team. You must work together to develop cures
and prevent disease outbreaks, before 4 deadly diseases (Blue, Yellow, Black, and Red) contaminate humanity.
Pandemic is a cooperative game. The players all win or lose together.
The goal is to discover cures for all 4 diseases. The players lose if:
8 outbreaks occur (a worldwide panic happens),
not enough disease cubes are left when needed (a disease spreads too much), or,
not enough player cards are left when needed (your team runs out of time).
Each player has a specific role with special abilities to improve the team's chances.
Eradication
1-INCREASE
MOVE THE INFECTION RATE
MARKER FORWARD 1 SPACE.
2-INFECT
DRAW THE BOTTOM CARD FROM
THE INFECTION DECK AND PUT
3 CUBES ON THAT CITY. DISCARD
THAT CARD.
3-INTENSIFY
SHUFFLE THE CARDS IN THE
INFECTION DISCARD PILE AND
PUT THEM ON TOP OF THE
INFECTION DECK.

To see a Pandemic teaching video, go to:
www.zmangames.com/pandemic-online-rules.html

SETUP:
Set out the board and pieces
Place outbreaks
and cure markers
Give each player cards and a pawn
Disease cubes
Give each player a reference card. Shuffle the Role cards and
deal 1 face up in front of each player. Place the matching
colored pawns for these roles in Atlanta. Remove from the
game the remaining Role cards and pawns.
Take the Epidemic cards out the Player Deck and set them
aside until Step 5. Shuffle the other Player cards (City and
Event cards). Deal cards to the players to form their initial
hands. Give cards according to the number of players:
Place the outbreaks marker on the "0" space of the
Outbreaks Track. Place the 4 cure markers, "vial" side up,
near the Discovered Cure Indicators.
Place the board within easy reach of all players. Put the 6 research
stations and disease cubes nearby. Separate the cubes by color into
4 supply piles. Place 1 research station in Atlanta.
Atlanta is home to the CDC, the Center for Disease Control and
Prevention.
Place infection rate marker
and infect 9 cities
Set the game's difficulty level, by using either 4, 5, or 6 Epidemic cards, for
an Introductory, Standard, or Heroic game. Remove any unused Epidemic
cards from the game.
Divide the remaining player cards into face down piles, as equal in size as
you can, so that the number of piles matches the number of Epidemic cards
you are using. Shuffle 1 Epidemic card into each pile, face down. Stack these
piles to form the Player Deck, placing smaller piles on the bottom.
Begin play
The players look at the City cards they have in their hand.
The player with the highest City population goes first.

PLAY:
Each player turn is divided into 3 parts:
1. Do 4 actions.
2. Draw 2 Player cards.
3. Infect cities.
After a player is done infecting cities, the player on
their left goes next.
Players should freely give each other advice. Let
everyone offer opinions and ideas. However, the player
whose turn it is decides what to do.
Your hand can have City and Event cards in it.
City cards are used in some actions and Event cards
can be played at any time.
Place the infection rate marker on the left-most "2" space of the
Infection Rate Track. Shuffle the Infection cards and flip over 3 of them.
Put 3 disease cubes of the matching color on each of these cities.
Flip over 3 more cards: put 2 disease cubes on each of these cities.
Flip over 3 more cards: put 1 disease cube on each of these cities.
(You will place a total of 18 disease cubes, each matching the color of
the city.) Place these 9 cards face up on the Infection Discard Pile.
The other Infection cards form the Infection Deck.
Use disease cubes matching the card colors.
Player Deck Player
Discard Pile
Prepare the Player Deck
Use 4 Epidemic cards
for your first game.
Use 6 after mastering
the Standard game.


1-INCREASE
MOVE THE INFECTION RATE
MARKER FORWARD 1 SPACE.
2-INFECT
DRAW THE BOTTOM CARD FROM
THE INFECTION DECK AND PUT
3 CUBES ON THAT CITY. DISCARD
THAT CARD.
3-INTENSIFY
SHUFFLE THE CARDS IN THE
INFECTION DISCARD PILE AND
PUT THEM ON TOP OF THE
INFECTION DECK.

1.Do 4 actions
2.Draw 2 cards
Resolve any epidemics
Discard to 7 cards
3.Infect cities
A white line that goes off the board "wraps around"
to the other edge and connects to a city.
Example: Sydney and Los Angeles are connected.

ACTIONS:
You may do up to 4 actions each turn.
Select any combination of the actions listed below. You may do the same action
several times, each time counting as 1 action. Your role's special abilities may change
how an action is done. Some actions involve discarding a card from your hand; all these
discards go to the Player Discard Pile.

MOVEMENT ACTIONS:
Drive / Ferry
Move to a city connected by a white line to the one you are in.
Direct Flight
Discard a City card to move to the city named on the card.
Charter Flight
Discard the City card that matches the city you are in to move to any city.
Shuttle Flight
Move from a city with a research station to any other city that has a
research station.

OTHER ACTIONS:
Build a Research Station
Discard the City card that matches the city you are in to place a research
station there. Take the research station from the pile next to the board. If all
6 research stations have been built, take a research station from anywhere
on the board.
Treat Disease
Remove 1 disease cube from the city you are in, placing it in the cube
supply next to the board. If this disease color has been cured (see
Discover a Cure below), remove all cubes of that color from the city you
are in.
If the last cube of a cured disease is removed from the board, this disease
is eradicated. Flip its cure marker from its "vial" side to its " " side.
Share Knowledge
You can do this action in two ways:
give the City card that matches the city you are in to another player, or
take the City card that matches the city you are in from another player.
The other player must also be in the city with you. Both of you need to
agree to do this.
If the player who gets the card now has more than 7 cards, that player must
immediately discard a card or play an Event card (see Event Cards on page 7).
Discover a Cure
At any research station, discard 5 City cards of the same color from your
hand to cure the disease of that color. Move the disease's cure marker to its
Cure Indicator.
If no cubes of this color are on the board, this disease is now eradicated.
Flip its cure marker from its "vial" side to its " " side.
If there are cubes from several cured diseases in a
city, you must still Treat Disease once for each cured
color to remove these cubes.
If more than 6 research stations were supplied,
set any extra aside during setup.
Example: If you have the Moscow
City card and are with another player
in Moscow, you can give this card to
that player. Or, if another player has
the Moscow card and you both are in
Moscow, then you can take it from that
player. In either case, you both must
agree before handing the card over.
Eradicating a disease is not needed to win. However,
when cities of an eradicated disease are infected, no
new disease cubes are placed there (see Epidemics
and Infections on page 6). Removing the last cube of
a disease that is not cured has no effect.
When a disease is cured, its cubes remain on the
board and new cubes can still be placed during
epidemics or infections (see Epidemics and
Infections on page 6). However, treating this disease
is now easier and you are closer to winning.

PLAY EXAMPLE:
On the first turn, Ben does 4 actions:
(1) Drive to Chicago (from Atlanta), (2) Drive to San Francisco,
(3) Treat Disease in San Francisco, removing a blue disease cube
there, and (4) Treat Disease in San Francisco again, removing a
second blue disease cube.
Ben has finished the Actions part of his turn.
Play Example: Later in the game, the red disease has been cured.
3 red cubes remain on the board in Manila, where Anna the Scientist
(white pawn) begins her turn. Anna (1) Treats Disease in Manila,
removing all 3 cubes with one action (since this disease has been
cured). This eradicates the red disease, so the red cure marker is
flipped over to its " " side.
George, the Operations Expert (green pawn), is in
Chennai, having built a research station there.
George tells Anna that he has the Chennai City card
in his hand and offers to let Anna take it from him
if she can get to Chennai. Anna discards her Manila
City card for a (2) Charter Flight, moving her pawn
to Chennai.
Anna then (3) Shares Knowledge with George, taking
his Chennai card. Doing this gives Anna 4 black cards,
which is not enough to cure a disease.
However, Anna is the Scientist and needs to discard only 4 cards of
the same color to cure the corresponding disease. Anna (4) Discovers
a Cure, discarding her 4 black cards at the Chennai research station.
The black cure marker is moved to the Black Cure Indicator.
Anna has finished the Actions part of her turn.
1.Do 4 actions
2.Draw 2 cards
Resolve any epidemics
Discard to 7 cards
3. Infect Cities
Flip over as many Infection cards from the top of the Infection Deck as the
current infection rate. This number is below the space of the Infection Rate
Track that has the infection rate marker. Flip these cards over one at a time,
infecting the city named on each card.
To infect a city, place 1 disease cube matching its color onto the city, unless
this disease has been eradicated. If the city already has 3 cubes of this color,
do not place a 4th cube. Instead, an outbreak of this disease occurs in the city
(see Outbreaks below). Discard this card to the Infection Discard Pile.
In this case in the second epidemic's Infection card will be the
only card to "reshuffle", ending on top of the Infection Deck.
An outbreak will then occur in this city during Infections (see
Infections, below), unless an Event card is played to prevent this
(see Event Cards on page 7).
1.Do 4 actions
2.Draw 2 cards
Resolve any epidemics
Discard to
3.Infect cities

PLAY EXAMPLE (cont.):
Anna ends her turn by infecting cities. The current
infection rate is 3, so Anna flips over the top 3 Infection cards: Seoul,
then Paris, then Algiers.
The red disease is eradicated, so Anna simply discards the Seoul card.
Paris has a blue cube on it, so Anna adds a second blue cube there and
discards the Paris card.
The black disease has been cured  but not eradicated (black cubes are
still on the board)  so Anna must infect Algiers. Since 3 black disease
cubes are already in Algiers, Anna does not place a 4th cube there.
Instead, a black disease outbreak happens in Algiers.
DRAW CARDS
After doing 4 actions, draw the top 2 cards together from the Player
Deck.
If, as you are about to draw, there are fewer than 2 cards left
in the Player Deck, the game ends and your team has lost!
(Do not reshuffle the discards to form a new deck.)
EPIDEMIC CARDS:
If your draws include any Epidemic cards, immediately do the following
steps in order:
1. Increase: Move the infection rate marker forward 1 space on the
Infection Rate Track.
2. Infect: Draw the bottom card from the Infection Deck. Unless its
disease color has been eradicated, put 3 disease cubes of that color on
the named city. If the city already has cubes of this color, do not add
3 cubes to it. Instead, add just enough cubes so that it has 3 cubes of
this color and then an outbreak of this disease occurs in the city (see
Outbreaks below). Discard this card to the Infection Discard Pile.
If you cannot place the number of cubes actually needed on
the board, because there are not enough cubes of the needed
color left in the supply, the game ends and your team has
lost! This can occur during an epidemic, an outbreak, or
infections (see Outbreaks and Infections below).
3. Intensify: Reshuffle just the cards in the Infection Discard Pile and
place them on top of the Infection Deck.
When doing these steps, remember to draw from the bottom
of the Infection Deck and to then reshuffle only the Infection
Discard Pile, placing it on top of the existing Infection Deck.
It is rare but possible to draw 2 Epidemic cards at once. In this case, do
all three steps above once and then again.
After resolving any Epidemic cards, remove them from the game.
Do not draw replacement cards for them.
HAND LIMIT:
If you ever have more than 7 cards in hand (after first resolving any
Epidemic cards you may have drawn), discard cards or play Event cards
until you have 7 cards in hand (see Event Cards on page 7).
Play Example (cont.): Anna draws 2
cards. Neither is an Epidemic card and
Anna is well under her 7-card hand limit,
so Anna continues her turn.

OUTBREAKS:
When a disease outbreak occurs, move the outbreaks marker forward
1 space on the Outbreaks Track. Then, place 1 cube of the disease color
on every city connected to the city. If any of them already has 3 cubes of
the disease color, do not place a 4th cube in those cities. Instead, in each of
them, a chain reaction outbreak occurs after the current outbreak is done.
When a chain reaction outbreak occurs, first move the outbreaks marker
forward 1 space. Then, place cubes as above, except do not add a cube to
cities that have already had an outbreak (or a chain reaction outbreak) as
part of resolving the current Infection card.
As a result of outbreaks, a city may have disease cubes of multiple colors on
it; up to 3 cubes of each color.
If the outbreaks marker reaches the last space of the Outbreaks
Track, the game ends and your team has lost!
TURN END:
After infecting cities and discarding Infection cards, your turn is over.
The player on your left begins a turn.
EVENT CARDS:
During a turn, any player may play Event cards. Playing
an Event card is not an action. The player who plays an
Event card decides how it is used.
Event cards can be played at any time, except in between
drawing and resolving a card.
Example: During infections, the first Infection card drawn causes an
outbreak. You may not play the Airlift Event card to move the Quarantine
Specialist to prevent this. After this outbreak happens however, you may
use Airlift to move the Quarantine Specialist (to possibly protect other
cities) before flipping over the next Infection card.
After playing an Event card, discard it to the Player Discard Pile.
PLAYER CARDS:
When playing the Introductory game (4 Epidemic cards), place your
cards face up in front of you, for all players to see.
When playing the Standard (5 Epidemics) or Heroic (6 Epidemics)
games, keep your cards private, so everyone has information to
contribute to play discussions.
Players may freely examine either discard pile at any time.
GAME END
The players win as soon as cures to all 4 diseases are discovered.
There are 3 ways for the game to end and the players to lose:
if the outbreaks marker reaches the last space of the Outbreaks Track,
if you are unable to place the number of disease cubes actually
needed on the board, or
if a player cannot draw 2 Player cards after doing his actions.
When 2 Epidemic cards are drawn together, events can be played
after resolving the first epidemic.
Experienced groups may decide to play with open hands,
if desired, in these games.
Only Player cards count towards your hand limit.
Your Role and your Reference cards are not part of your hand.
The players do not have to eradicate all 4 diseases to win;
just cure them. Once all diseases are cured, the game ends and players
win immediately, no matter how many cubes are on the board.

PLAY EXAMPLE (cont.):
A black disease outbreak
occurs in Algiers. Anna moves the outbreaks
marker forward 1 space and places 1 black cube
on every city connected to Algiers: Madrid, Paris,
Istanbul, and Cairo. Cairo already has 3 black
cubes, so Anna does not place a 4th cube there.
Instead, a chain reaction outbreak occurs in Cairo.
Anna moves the outbreaks marker forward
1 more space. She places 1 black cube on every
city connected to Cairo  Istanbul, Baghdad,
Riyadh, and Khartoum  but not Algiers,
as Algiers has already had an outbreak while
resolving this Infection card. Then, Anna discards
the Algiers Infection card.

Play any time. Not an action.
EVENT
AIRLIFT
Move Any 1 pawn to Any city.
Get perMission before MovinG
Another paAyer's pAwn.

COMMONLY OVERLOOKED RULES:
You do not draw a replacement card after drawing an Epidemic card.
You may Discover a Cure at any Research Station  the color of its
city does not need to match the disease you are curing.
On your turn, you may take a card from another player, if you are both
in the city that matches the card you are taking.
On your turn, you may take any City card from the Researcher (only),
if you are both in the same city.
Your hand limit applies immediately after getting a card from
another player.

CREDITS:
Game design: Matt Leacock
Artwork: Chris Quilliams
Special thanks to Donna Leacock, Hillary Carey, Chris and Kim Farrell, Rich
Fulcher, Ken Tidwell, Corbin Nash, Jim Cote, Steve Duff, Wei-Hwa Huang, and,
for additional testing, Beth Heile and John Knoerzer.
Very special thanks to Tom Lehmann for his assistance.
Learn the rules online at:
www.zmangames.com/pandemic-online-rules.html
 2015 F2Z Entertainment Inc.
31 rue de la Cooprative
Rigaud QC J0P 1P0
Canada
Z-Man, Z-Man Games, Z-Man Games & Design are trademarks of F2Z Entertainment Inc. Apple and the
Apple logo are trademarks of Apple Inc., registered in the U.S. and other countries. App Store is a service
mark of Apple Inc. Google Play is a trademark of Google Inc. Amazon's trademark is used under license from
Amazon.com, Inc. or its affiliates.

ROLES:
Each player has a role with special abilities to improve your team's chances.
CONTINGENCY PLANNER
The Contingency Planner may, as an action, take an
Event card from anywhere in the Player Discard Pile
and place it on his Role card. Only 1 Event card can be
on his role card at a time. It does not count against his
hand limit.
When the Contingency Planner plays the Event card on his role card,
remove this Event card from the game (instead of discarding it).
As an action, take any discarded
Event card and store it on this card.
When you play the stored Event
card, remove it from the game.
Limit: 1 Event card on this card at a
time, which is not part of your hand.
CONTINGENCY
PLANNER
DISPATCHER
The Dispatcher may, as an action, either:
move any pawn, if its owner agrees, to any city
containing another pawn, or
move another player's pawn, if its owner agrees,
as if it were his own.
The Dispatcher can only move other players' pawns; he may not direct
them to do other actions, such as Treat Disease.
Move another player's pawn as if it
were yours.
As an action, move any pawn to a
city with another pawn.
Get permission before moving
another player's pawn.
DISPATCHER
MEDIC
The Medic removes all cubes, not 1, of the same color
when doing the Treat Disease action.
If a disease has been cured, he automatically removes
all cubes of that color from a city, simply by entering it
or being there. This does not take an action.
The Medic also prevents placing disease cubes (and outbreaks) of cured
diseases in his location.
Remove all cubes of one color when
doing Treat Disease.
Automatically remove cubes of
cured diseases from the city you
are in (and prevent them from being
placed there).
MEDIC
OPERATIONS EXPERT
The Operations Expert may, as an action, either:
build a research station in his current city without
discarding (or using) a City card, or
once per turn, move from a research station to any city
by discarding any City card.
As an action, build a research
station in the city you are in
(no City card needed).
Once per turn as an action, move
from a research station to any city
by discarding any City card.
OPERATIONS
EXPERT
QUARANTINE SPECIALIST
The Quarantine Specialist prevents both outbreaks and
the placement of disease cubes in the city she is in
and all cities connected to that city. She does not affect
cubes placed during setup.
QUARANTINE
SPECIALIST
Prevent disease cube placements
(and outbreaks) in the city you are
in and all cities connected to it.
SCIENTIST
The Scientist needs only 4 (not 5) City cards of
the same disease color to Discover a Cure for that
disease.
SCIENTIST
You need only 4 cards of the same
color to do the Discover a Cure
action.
info@zmangames.com
www.zmangames.com
RESEARCHER
When doing the Share Knowledge action, the Researcher
may give any City card from her hand to another player
in the same city as her, without this card having to match
her city. The transfer must be from her hand to the other
player's hand, but it can occur on either player's turn.
You may give any 1 of your City cards
when you Share Knowledge. It need not
match your city. A player who Shares
Knowledge with you on their turn can
take any 1 of your City cards.
RESEARCHER
The Dispatcher may not use the Operations Expert's special
move ability when moving the Operation Expert's pawn.
When moving a player's pawn as if it were your own, discard cards
for Direct and Charter Flights from your hand. A card discarded for a
Charter Flight must match the city the pawn is moving from.
The Medic's automatic removal of cubes can occur on other players'
turns, if he is moved by the Dispatcher or the Airlift Event.
8 Follow Pandemic The Board game on

GAME NAME:
Agricola

COMPONENTS:
- 5 farmyards for the players (with farmyard spaces as well as 1 example
on the reverse side)
- 3 game boards for the game actions (including one with an alternative
reverse side for the Family game, as well as two examples)
- 1 board for Major Improvements (with a summary of scoring on the reverse side)
- 360 Cards:
- 169 yellow "Occupation" cards (66 cards for 1-5 players;
- 41 cards for 3-5 players; 62 cards for 4-5 players)
- 139 orange "Minor Improvement" cards (including 7 upgrades
from Major or Minor Improvements)
- 10 red "Major Improvement" cards
- 14 blue Round cards with possible actions for rounds 1 to 14
- 16 green Action cards with possible actions that depend
on the number of players
- 5 grey Begging cards
- 5 Summary cards
- 2 Deck cards (1 Deck I, 1 Deck K)

WOODEN PLAYING PIECES:
- 5 Family member discs, 4 Stables and 15 Fences
- in each of the five player colors (blue, green, red, natural wood and purple)
- 33 round, dark brown Wood counters
- 27 round, light brown Clay counters
- 15 round, white Reed counters
- 18 round, grey Stone counters
- 27 round, yellow Grain counters
- 18 round, orange Vegetable counters
- 21 Sheep tokens (white cubes)
- 18 Wild boar tokens (black cubes)
- 15 Cattle tokens (brown cubes)
- 1 Starting player token

AND ALSO:
33 brown/grey Field/Stone house tiles
24 brown/red Wood/Clay hut tiles
36 yellow Food markers labeled "1"
9 Multiplication markers (can apply to animals, goods or Food)
3 Claim markers (with "Guest" on the reverse)
1 Scoring pad
An agricultural development game for 1-5 players by Uwe Rosenberg
PLAYTING TIME:
Half an hour per player, shorter as a Family game.
AGE:
From 12 years

OVERVIEW:
Central Europe, around 1670 AD. The Plague which has raged since 1348 has finally been overcome. The civilized world is revitalized.
People are upgrading and renovating their huts. Fields must be plowed, tilled and harvested. The famine of the previous years
has encouraged people to eat more meat (a habit that we continue to this day).
The 17th Century: Not an easy time for farming
(Agricola is the Latin word for "farmer")


During the Feeding phase of the
Harvest, whenever you cannot or
choose not to produce enough Food
to feed your family, you must take

-1 point per unused space in the Farmyard
1 point per fenced stable & per Clay hut room
2 points per Stone house room
3 points per Family member

Note: The terms
"Person" and "Family
member" are used in
the rules and on the
game cards to mean the
round Family member
discs (see illustration);
"Player" means the
humans who are taking
part in a game of
Agricola.
The term "Other players" means
all other players  so not the player
taking the action.
Reverse sides:
The first game board has a different reverse
side which is used for the simplified
Family game.
The other two game boards should be
turned facedown during the rules explanation.
They have illustrative examples.
The reverse sides of two of the farmyards
can be used as supply areas for game
components, if the farmyards are not in
use in the game.
The "Occupation" and
"Minor Improvement" cards
are divided into 3 decks  a
Basic deck (E), an Interactive
deck (I) and a Complex deck
(K). To vary the cards that are
used in a game, players can
play with cards from only one
deck, can take a share of their
cards from each deck, or can
shuffle the decks together. The
deck that a card belongs to is
indicated by the symbol on the
right hand side of the card.

OBJECT OF THE GAME:
Players start the game with a farming couple living in a simple two-roomed hut. During
the course of the game, these families have abundant possibilities to improve their
quality of life by building up their home, improving their fields and breeding their
animals. In each of the game's 14 rounds, each of a player's Family members may take
exactly one action. They can generate building resources such as Wood and Clay, add
more people to their family, and ensure that they are fed. In each round, each action can
only be taken by one Person  players will miss out if another player chooses the action
first. A new action becomes available in each round  see Overview of game phases. You
must plan to grow your family at the right time  but not too soon, because even the next
generation must be fed. Growing your family is important, though, because it allows
you to take more actions as they become available. At the end of the game, the winner is
the player who has established the best farmyard  see Scoring overview. Victory points
are awarded for the number of fields, pastures and fenced stables, as well as for Grain,
Vegetables, Sheep, Wild boar and Cattle. Players lose one point for each unused farmyard
space. Additional points are awarded for extension and renovation of the family's home,
for the number of Family members, and for played Occupation and Improvement
cards. There are examples of play, with explanations, on the reverse sides of three
of the boards.

GAME SETUP:
Place the three game boards as shown in the illustration to the right.
Each player chooses a color and takes the playing pieces in that color, as well
as one farmyard. These are placed in front of the player (facing whichever direction the
player chooses). On each of the two building spaces on this farmyard, players first place
a Wooden hut room tile and then (in each of these rooms) one of their Family members.
(See Illustration, top right). The remaining playing pieces (additional Family members,
fences and stables) remain in the bag for now or are placed to one side. Sort the remaining
house and hut tiles and the rest of the game components and place them beside the playing
area.
For your first game(s) of Agricola, we strongly recommend that you use the "Family
game" rules given on page 8. The game is the same as the full game, except that it is
played without Occupation and Minor Improvement cards and with slightly different
Action spaces. Starting with the Family game is a great way to get acquainted with
the game before you try the full Agricola experience
Cards
Sort the cards according to the color of the reverse side.
Depending on the number of players, different green Action cards (B) are used .
There are also blue Round cards (A), yellow Occupation cards (C), orange "Minor
Improvement" cards (D), red "Major Improvement" cards (E), grey Begging cards (F) and
Summary cards (G).
A. Sort the blue Round cards according to the Stage of the game. Shuffle each small pile
and place the piles on top of each other with the cards for Stage 6 at the bottom, Stage 5
on top of that, etc  finishing with the four cards for Stage 1 on the top. The Round cards
make new actions available during the game. (These are listed on the game summary
cards and in the Appendix, section 1.2).
B. If you are playing with 3, 4 or 5 players, take the corresponding set of green
Action cards and place them face up on the spaces to the left of the first game board.
The order in which the cards are laid out is irrelevant. In a 3-player game, there are
4 cards, in 4- and 5-player games there are 6 cards. (There is more information about
these cards in the Appendix, section 1.3). In solo and 2-player games, no green Action
cards are used.
C. The purple symbol on the left side of the yellow Occupation cards shows how many
players the card is used for: means for 1-5 players, for 3-5 players, for 4-5
players. Cards that are not in use are removed from the game; the full deck of Occupation
cards is only available in a 4- or 5-player game. Shuffle the cards. Each player is dealt a
hand of 7 Occupation cards and may look through them. The remaining Occupation cards
are put to one side.

Once you have a Stone house, at the
start of a round, you can always either
pay 1 Food to play an Occupation
card or play an Improvement card by
paying its costs.

D. Shuffle the orange Minor Improvement cards. Each player is dealt a hand
of 7 Minor Improvement cards and may look through them. The remaining
Minor Improvement cards are put to one side.
E. Place the 10 red Major Improvement cards face up on the Major
Improvements board. As soon as 9 Major Improvements have
been bought, the board is turned over to show the scoring overview
and the remaining Major Improvement is placed on the space on the
reverse of the board.
F. Place the grey Begging cards face-up beside the playing area.
G. Each player takes a Summary card and places it in their
playing area. One side of the card gives an overview of the game
phases; the other explains the scoring at the end of the game.
There are no scoring rounds during the game.
Starting player
Players choose a starting player who receives the Starting player marker and 2 Food.
The other players each receive 3 Food. The Starting player marker is not automatically
passed on to the next player at the end of a round: it passes to the player who chooses the
"Starting player" action (see Illustration).

PLAY OF THE GAME:
The game consists of six stages, which are divided into 14 rounds.
Each round follows the same pattern and consists of four phases. There is a Harvest at the
end of each stage (after rounds 4, 7, 9, 11, 13 and 14). This is shown on the game boards
as Harvest.
PHASE 1:
Start the round  draw a new Round card.
Turn over the top Round card and place it on the appropriate space on the board. The
action on this card is available to all players, and can be used not only in this round but in
all subsequent rounds.
All actions which occur at the beginning of a particular round or at the beginning of every
round occur now.
The text on some cards instructs players to place items on the Round card spaces. If there
are tiles, Food and/or other playing pieces on the space for the current round, these are
distributed to the appropriate players (who earned them by playing an Occupation or
Improvement) The functions of the cards are explained on page 7.
PHASE 2:
Replenish  place new goods and animals.
Place new goods and Food on any Action spaces on the board that require them (on the
printed spaces as well as on Action and Round cards). These spaces are shown by an
arrow (see Illustration). If goods or Food are already on a space, the new goods/Food are
added to them.
3 Wood means that 3 Wood tokens are placed on that space each round, 1 Cattle means
that 1 Cattle token is placed on the space each round, etc. The Fishing and Traveling
Players Action spaces receive 1 Food each round. These goods and Food are taken from
the general supply and can build up over several rounds  there is no upper limit.
PHASE 3:
Work phase
In clockwise order, starting with the Starting player, players take turns taking a single
Family member from their farmyard, placing it on an unoccupied Action space and taking
that action. Play continues until all Family members have been placed. A player may
only ever place one Family member at a time. Each Action space can only be used by
one Person in one round. A Family member may never occupy an Action space without
performing its action.
Some Action spaces offer players several choices of action or require a player to take
one action before (optionally) taking a second action. Whenever a player takes building
resources, Grain, Vegetables or Food, the tokens are placed in a player's personal supply
in view of the other players. Animals may not be placed in the supply; they must be
placed directly into the farmyard (See Action D, page 9).
In the Family game variant, the
yellow Occupation cards and the
orange Minor Improvement cards
are not used. In addition, some of
the Action spaces are different in the
Family game. (See reverse of game
board 1 and also page 9). Apart from
that, all the rules of the full game
apply.
The Starting player marker only
moves when a player chooses the
Starting Player action.
The Plowman receives fields in later
rounds; the owner of the Goose Pond
receives 1 Food for each of 4 rounds.
These are placed on the appropriate
Round card space(s)
The Traveling Players Action space
is only used in the 4- and 5-player
game. In the Family Game, Family
members can also obtain Food from
the Storehouse.
The Action cards are described individually
in section 1 of the Appendix.
Some Action cards give you a choice
of action, while others (optionally)
allow you to take an additional
action

During the Feeding phase of the
Harvest, whenever you cannot or
choose not to produce enough Food
to feed your family, you must take
1 Begging card for each missing Food.

-1 point per unused space in the Farmyard
1 point per fenced stable & per Clay hut room
2 points per Stone house room
3 points per Family member
Plowman:
Add 4, 7 and 10 to the current round
and place 1 field on each corresponding
Round space. At the start of these
rounds, you can Plow that field by
paying 1 Food.
Goose Pond:
Place 1 Food each on the next 4
remaining Round spaces. At the start
of these rounds, you receive the Food.

Animals that cannot be placed into the farmyard must be returned to the general supply or
immediately transformed into Food using an Improvement with the symbol. A player
who plays a card from their hand or buys a Major Improvement (see page 10) must read
the text on the card aloud so that all the other players are aware of its effects.
Players are not allowed to hide their personal supply from other players or to completely
cover cards that they have played.
PHASE 4:
Return home
Players remove their Family members from the game boards and return them to their
home.
Harvest Time
Players feed their Family members during the Harvest, which occurs at the end of each
stage of the game (see Appendix, section 6)  that is, after rounds 4, 7, 9, 11, 13 and 14
(see game boards 2 and 3). The Harvest consists of three phases, which occur one after
another.
HARVEST PHASE 1:
The Field phase
Players remove 1 Grain or Vegetable token from each Sown field in their farmyard (see
Illustration) and place them in their personal supply. Players may also receive additional
Food from Occupation or Improvement cards that they have played.
HARVEST PHASE 2:
Feeding the family
At the end of this phase, each player must feed his or her family by paying 2 Food
per Family member. Offspring that were born during the current round ("Newborn
offspring", typically from a Family growth action) only consume 1 Food for this round,
but will require 2 Food in future Harvests.
Each unprocessed Grain or Vegetable may be converted to 1 Food at any time. Fireplaces
and Cooking Hearths, as well as other specific Occupations and Improvements, allow
players to convert Vegetables at any time, at a better exchange rate. Improvements with
the symbol can be used to convert animals to Food at any time. Improvements with
the symbol can be used to Bake bread, but only when the player takes a Bake bread
action during a round.
Unprocessed animals have no Food value.

BEGGING:
A player who cannot or does not wish to produce the required Food must take a Begging
card for each missing Food  players may not give up members of their family to avoid
the need to Feed them. At the end of the game, players lose 3 points for each Begging
card.
HARVEST PHASE 3:
Breeding
Lastly, any player with at least 2 animals of the same type receives exactly one additional
(baby) animal of that type  but only if the lamb, the shoat (piglet) or the calf can be
accommodated in the farmyard (or on an appropriate Improvement card, for example
the "Animal Yard", "Wildlife Reserve" or "Forest Pasture"). Baby animals and parent
animals may not be converted into Food immediately after the birth (for example, if you
only have room for two animals of that type); they simply run away if they cannot be
accommodated. The animals breed regardless of where the parent animals are placed (see
Example)  the parents may be in separate areas.
End of the game
The game ends after the Harvest at the end of the 14th round (Stage 6), after which the
players' scores are calculated. There is a scoring overview on the back of the board for
Major Improvements and on the back of the Summary card, and the scoring is detailed on
page 8.
Tally each player's Victory Points on the scoring sheet. The player with the most points is
the winner. If there is a tie, the tied players share the victory (or can play another game of
Agricola to break the tie).
Example: A player who chooses the
Build room(s) and/or Build Stable(s)
Action space may choose not to build
a house and only to build stables. In
contrast, the After Family growth,
also 1 Minor Improvement action
does not allow a player to ignore
Family growth and only play a Minor
Improvement.
Additional possibilities for feeding
the family are offered by the Joinery,
Pottery and Basketmaker's Workshop.
These Major Improvements allow a
player to convert Wood, Clay and
Reed to Food during the Harvest (see
Appendix, Section 2).
Players with 3 or more animals of the
same kind do not get more than one
baby animal. There is room for this
baby animal in the stable.

ACTIONS:
Four main types of action can be taken to improve a player's farmyard. (A) Players can
extend and renovate their Wooden huts. (B) An extended home enables the family to
grow. (C) Fields can be Plowed and Sown and (D) Pastures can be fenced to hold animals.
Action A  Extend Wooden hut or renovate it into a Clay hut or Stone
house
At the start of the game, each player has a Wooden hut with two rooms. Players can
extend their huts by Building rooms using the Build room(s) action (see Illustration).
New rooms must be orthogonally (i.e. not diagonally) adjacent to the existing rooms (see
Illustration).
There is no upper limit on the number of rooms that a player may build.
New rooms are always made from the same material as the rest of the home. Wooden
huts can only be extended with Wooden rooms; Clay huts only with Clay rooms; and
Stone houses only with Stone rooms.
Extending a Wooden hut costs 5 Wood and 2 Reed (for the roof), a Clay hut 5 Clay and
2 Reed, and a Stone house 5 Stone and 2 Reed.
During the game, the Wooden hut can be Renovated to a Clay hut and, later, a Stone
house. The first Renovation Action space becomes available during Stage 2 (rounds
5 to 7).
To renovate your Wooden hut to a Clay hut, you require 1 Clay token for each room in
your Wooden hut, plus 1 Reed (for the roof). Turn the Wooden hut tiles over to show the
Clay hut rooms.
For the second renovation  from Clay hut to Stone house  you require 1 Stone token
for each room in your Clay hut, plus 1 Reed (for the roof). Replace the Clay hut tiles with
Stone house tiles.
Players can only ever renovate a complete hut. Rooms may never be renovated one at a
time.
The Renovation action only allows a single renovation. A double renovation from
Wooden hut to Stone house in one turn is not allowed.
Stables
A player who chooses the Build Room(s) action space on the left-hand board may choose
to instead, or in addition, build up to 4 stables for 2 Wood each. Stables provide shelter for
animals (see page 7).
Additional actions after a Renovation
The Renovation card for Stage 2 allows players to purchase a Major (or Minor)
Improvement after performing the renovation  players may not, however, ignore the
Renovation action and only play an Improvement. A second Renovation card comes into
play in the last round of the game (see Illustration). This allows players to Fence pastures
after performing a renovation. (See Action D on page 6).
Action B- Family growth
In Stage 2 (Rounds 5-7), the after Family growth, also 1 Minor Improvement action
becomes available. Players must have room for offspring in their home before they can
use this action  that is, they must have more rooms in their home than they have
Family members. After taking Family growth, the player may choose to purchase a
Minor Improvement (see page 7).
The Family growth even without room in your home action card
becomes available in Stage 5 (Round 12 or 13). With this action, a
player may grow his or her family regardless of the number of rooms
in their home.
A player who chooses a Family growth action adds their newborn
offspring to the Action space (see Illustration, left).
In the Return home phase, the new Family member is taken home
and placed in its room. If it doesn't have its own room, it shares a
room with another Family member. A Player who takes the Family
growth action will therefore have one additional (adult) Family
member to use from the following round onwards. The new Family
member is not available for use in the round when it is produced
 it must first grow up. Families are limited to a maximum of 5 members. A player who
already has 5 Family members in play may not choose the Family growth action.
Each Family member requires their
own room (Exception: see Family
Growth, below).
Example: Claudia selects the Build
room(s) action and builds the third
room of a Wooden hut with 5 Wood and
2 Reed (see picture, at the top). Next,
she chooses the Renovate action, pays
3 Clay and 1 Reed and turns the 3
rooms of the Wooden hut over to show
the Clay hut side. Later, she chooses
Build room(s) again, pays 5 Clay and
2 Reed and extends her Clay hut by one
room (see picture, below).
After this, she could extend her hut
again or pay 4 Stone and 1 Reed to use
Renovation again and swap the four
Clay hut tiles for four Stone house tiles
 any additional rooms she built would
then have to be made of Stone.

Action C  Plowing fields  Grain and Vegetables
A player who chooses the Plow 1 field action takes a field
tile and places it on an empty space in his or her farmyard.
If the player already has fields, the new field must be placed
orthogonally adjacent to an existing field. Players may use at
most 1 Plow Improvement each time they select the Plow 1 field
action.
A player who chooses Take 1 Grain takes one Grain marker
and places it in his or her personal supply  the similar Take 1
Vegetable action becomes available in Stage 3 (Round 8 or 9).
The Sow action allows a player to plant 1 or more empty fields: the
player takes 1 Grain from his or her personal supply and places it on an
empty (fallow) field, then adds 2 Grain from the general supply to the
field.
Instead of Grain, a player may also Sow Vegetables by taking
1 Vegetable from his or her personal supply and placing it on the empty
field. 1 Vegetable from the general supply is added to the field.
A newly planted Grain field holds 3 counters, a Vegetable field
2 counters (see illustration, top right).
Grain and Vegetables are harvested during the Harvest (see Play of the
Game on page 4, Harvest). Grain and Vegetables that are in a player's
personal supply may be converted to 1 Food at any time  or to more
than 1 Food with an appropriate Improvement.
If a field is emptied, it can be replanted using the Sow action  a
Harvested field does not need to be re-Plowed. In Stage 5 (Round 12 or
13), a new action allows players to Plow a field and immediately Sow
one or more empty fields (see Illustration).
Baking bread as an additional action when plowing
A player who chooses the Sow and/or Bake bread Action space may choose what to
do with any or all Grain counters in his or her personal supply. Grain may be sown in
empty fields (see above), be Baked into a loaf of bread and converted to Food or be left
in the supply. Baking bread requires an appropriate Improvement with the symbol.
A Fireplace allows one Grain to be converted to 2 Food, a Cooking Hearth converts it to
3 Food. A Stone Oven allows up to 2 Grain to be converted to 4 Food each and a Clay
Oven allows at most 1 Grain to be converted to 5 Food (see also Major Improvements in
Appendix, section 3).
Action D  Raising animals: Fence Pastures, Build Stables, Raise Sheep, Wild
Boar and Cattle.
Each player may raise exactly one animal as a pet in his or her home, regardless of the
home's size and type. The pet does not take a room away from a Family member.
To hold more animals, players must Fence pastures. Each pasture may only hold animals
of one type  Sheep, Wild boar or Cattle. Up to 2 animals may live on each square of the
pasture: Pastures that occupy 1 farmyard square can hold 2 animals; 2 squares can hold 4
animals; 3 squares can hold 6 animals etc.
During the course of the game, players may rearrange their animals at any time, as long as
these rules are followed. A player may release some or all of their animals at any time, at
will (for example, to make room for other animals in a farmyard space). Animals breed at
the very end of the Harvest (see page 5). Animals breed at the very end of the Harvest (see
page 5).
The Fences action allows a player to immediately Fence pastures at a cost of 1 Wood
for each fence. Fences border the pastures and are laid between the farmyard spaces;
one fence may border more than one pasture. Like rooms and fields, all of a player's
pastures must be orthogonally adjacent. Fences may only be built if they will create a fully
enclosed pasture, with fences on all sides. The edge of the farmyard board, stables, fields
and rooms do not count as fences. Each player may build at most 15 fences. Fields and
rooms may not be completely surrounded with a fence. Fences may not be demolished
once they have been built. If a player has already built pastures, any new pastures must
border the existing ones. You may subdivide an existing pasture by adding a fence or
fences (see example in the Appendix, section 1.2).
1 Grain becomes 3, 1 Vegetable
becomes 2. Players can use the Sow
action to sow several empty fields at
once. It is irrelevant whether Grain
or Vegetables was sown in the field
previously. If it has been completely
Harvested, it may be re-Sown.
Example: Jakob has 2 empty fields,
as well as 1 Grain and 1 Vegetable
in his personal supply. He uses the
Grain and Vegetables as seeds and
plants them in his fields, using the
Sow and/or bake bread action.
After Sowing, there are 3 Grain on
one field and 2 Vegetables on the
other. In each of the two following
harvests, he will receive 1 Grain and
1 Vegetable. After that, the Vegetable
field is empty. Jakob plows a new
field and chooses the Sow and/or
Bake bread action again. He plants
the two harvested Vegetables in the
two empty fields. He cannot plant
anything in the third field, because
it still contains one Grain. He uses
a Baking Improvement with the
symbol to bake his two Grain into
bread.
11 fences have created 3 pastures. In
one are two white Sheep (this pasture
is full), the next contains one Wild
boar and the large pasture (bottom)
provides grazing room for 3 brown

Enclosed farmyard spaces are considered to be "used" (See Scoring).
Building stables
Placing a stable in a pasture doubles the capacity of the entire pasture. Stables can be built
at a cost of 2 Wood using the Build room(s) and/or Build stable(s) Action space. They
may be placed on any space in the farmyard that does not already contain a room or a
field, and may not be removed. Stables need not be fenced in: each unfenced stable may
hold exactly 1 animal. Only 1 stable may be built in any farmyard space. A player may
fence the stable in later, in order to create a new pasture with doubled capacity.
Occupation and Improvement cards
At the start of the game, each player receives 7 Occupation cards and 7 Minor
Improvement cards.
A player who plays a card from their hand or buys a Major Improvement must read the
text on the card aloud so that all the other players are aware of its effects.
Occupation cards
A player can use the 1 Occupation Action space(s) to play one
of these cards face-up on the table.
On the 1 Occupation Action space that is printed on the lefthand
game board, a player's first Occupation is free, and each
additional Occupation costs 1 Food. In the 35 player game, a
second Occupation space has varying costs depending on the
number of players (see the appropriate Action cards).
The text on the Occupation cards applies to the player as soon as the card
is played. Cards that are in a player's hand have no effect on the game.
Several cards, including the Countryman, Acrobat and Net Fisherman, are
printed with a Claim symbol  if a player with one of these Occupations
meets the stated condition, a Claim token is placed on the appropriate
Action space with the arrow pointing towards the player with the claim.
Improvement cards
In addition to the Minor Improvements, there are also ten Major Improvement cards. In each
game, different Minor Improvements will come into play, but the same Major Improvements
are available in each game and may be used by any player. These are described in Section 2
of the Appendix.
The 1 Major or Minor Improvement Action space allows a player to purchase either a
Major or Minor Improvement  as does the Renovation space. Minor Improvements may
also be purchased  in conjunction with other actions  on the Starting player and Family
growth action spaces. Players may not choose the action After Family growth, also 1 Minor
Improvement and only purchase an Improvement: This card only allows an Improvement
after Family growth (see Action B  Family Growth on page 5).
The upper-right corner of an Improvement card shows its cost: goods that a player must pay
in order to play the card. Grain and Vegetables that are paid must be taken from a player's
supply and may not be taken directly from a field. Some Improvement cards (for example the
Cooking Hearth) have a slash, showing that the player may choose between two options to
pay for the Improvement.
Some Minor Improvements require the player to have a prerequisite  these are shown in the
top left corner. In order to play these cards, the player must have the required goods, tiles or
cards on the table in front of him or her. Of course, the condition is fulfilled if the player has
more than the required number of fields or cards.
Many Minor and all Major Improvements are worth Victory Points at the end of the game.
These are shown by the symbol at the left beside the picture. The Bonus Points symbol on
some cards (bottom center) indicates that they also give variable Bonus points  these are
described in the text on the card.
Some Minor Improvements (Traveling cards) are placed in the hand of the next
player to the left after they are played and acted on. These are indicated by the
brown arrows to either side of the illustration and the text on the card explains how
they are used.

Whenever you play 1 Occupation,
you receive 3 Food before you pay
the costs of the Occupation.

When the term "supply" is used on
a card, it always means the general
supply, unless it specifically states
otherwise.
As soon as a player who has played
the Net Fisherman uses a Family
member to harvest Reed, the green
Claim marker is placed on the Fishing
space. If there is still Food on the
space during the Return home phase,
the player receives it.
If one of your people uses an Action
space that provides Reed, you can
take all the Food markers from the
"Fishing" space in the Returning
home phase (Phase 4).
1 Occupation
(costs 2 Food)
If a card requires a player to have a
Vegetable (Grain) field, he must have
a field (or an Improvement card) with
Vegetables (Grain) growing on it. An
empty, plowed field does not count.
- 5 Food
(pre-printed)
- 5 Clay
- 3 Grain
(pre-printed)
- 4 Sheep
Some Minor Improvements are Upgrade cards. Playing these cards not only costs goods
but also requires the player to return an existing played or acquired Improvement. Upgraded
Major Improvements are returned to the Major Improvements board and may be bought
again by any player (including the same one as before). Upgraded Minor Improvements are
removed from the game.

SCORING:
The game is scored at the end of Round 14. The Summary cards have scoring tables, as
does the reverse side of the Major Improvements board. The following categories are
scored one after another:
Fields: All field tiles that are on the player's farmyard are scored, regardless of whether
they are currently fallow or are sown. A player with 0 or 1 fields loses 1 point. Each field
after the first scores 1 point, up to a maximum of 4 points for 5 or more fields. Players
score -1/1/2/3/4 points for 0-1/2/3/4/5+ fields.
Pastures: Points are awarded for fenced areas ("Pastures"), not for the number of
farmyard spaces that are fenced in ("Pasture spaces"). The size of the individual pastures
is irrelevant. A player with no pastures loses 1 point. Each pasture scores 1 point, up to a
maximum of 4 points for 4 or more pastures. Players score -1/1/2/3/4 points for 0/1/2/3/4+
pastures.
Grain and Vegetables: All of a player's Grain and Vegetables are scored  whether it is in
the fields or in the player's supply. A player with no Grain loses 1 point. After that, players
score 1/2/3/4 points for 1/4/6/8+ Grain. A player with no Vegetables loses 1 point. After
that, players score 1 point per Vegetable up to a maximum of 4 points.
Animals: A player loses a point for having no animals of a particular type. Players score
-1/1/2/3/4 points for 0/1/4/6/8+ Sheep; -1/1/2/3/4 points for 0/1/3/5/7+ Wild boar; and
-1/1/2/3/4 points for 0/1/2/4/6+ Cattle.
Unused farmyard spaces: No additional points are awarded for using farmyard spaces,
but players lose 1 point for each unused farmyard space. Farmyard spaces are counted as
"used", if they are fenced in or if they have a room tile, field tile or unfenced stable on
them. In other words, "unused" farmyard spaces are empty and unfenced.
Fenced Stables: Each fenced stable earns the player 1 point. No points are given for
unfenced stables. Players do not lose points for having no stables. An unfenced stable has
the advantage that the player avoids losing a point for having unused farmyard spaces.
Huts, Houses & Family Members
Players earn 1 point for each room in a Clay hut (so a player with 4 Clay rooms earns 4
points), and 2 points for each room in a Stone house (so a player with 4 rooms earns 8
points). Rooms in a Wooden hut do not earn any Victory Points.
Players earn 3 points for each Family member, up to a maximum of 15 points (as the
number of Family members cannot be greater than 5).
Points for cards
A point value is shown in a yellow circle on the left of the Minor and Major Improvement
cards. Players lose 3 points for each Begging Card that they hold at the end of the game.
Bonus points: The text on various Improvement and Occupation cards describes how
Bonus points are awarded. Cards which earn Bonus points have a Bonus point symbol at
the bottom.
Number of game components
The only game components that have been deliberately limited in number are the 5 Family
member discs, the 4 stables and the 15 fences for each player. If the other game components
run out, a substitute should be improvised. To help, there are also multiplication markers,
which multiply by 3 or 4 on the front and by 5 on the back. To show which resource the
marker applies to, one of the appropriate goods is placed on top of the marker. Some
markers are pre-printed with Food and Grain.
Agricola as a Family Game (for 1-5 people from 10 years)
In the simplified version of Agricola, the Occupation and Minor Improvement cards are
not used  players do not have a hand of cards.
The first game board is turned face-down, showing the "Agricola Family Game" side, and
in a 35 player game only the "Family Game" Action cards are used.
The Major or Minor Improvement action is restricted to Major Improvements.
Otherwise, the rules are the same as for the full game.
In scoring, enclosed pastures
are counted  not the individual
pasture spaces. In this example,
there are 2 pastures (not 3).
All of a player's Grain and
Vegetable markers are counted
 in the player's supply as well as
in the fields.
"Unused spaces"
means each space
in the farmyard that
is not covered with
a room tile, has not
been plowed into a field, that is not
enclosed by a fence and on which
there is no stable.

SOLO VERSION:
 (for 1 person, from 12 years)
To play a Solo game, start with 0 Food. The left-hand spaces
on the left game board remain empty, as in the 2-player game.
Otherwise, play the game by the same rules as the multi-player
game, taking your turns one after another. After you play a
Minor Improvement that should be passed to the player on the
left, it is removed from the game.
Exceptions: Adult Family members must be fed 3 Food each at
Harvest time (Newborn offspring are still fed only 1). The
"3 Wood" Action space only supplies 2 Wood in any round.
To play a series of Solo games:
After the first game, choose one of your played Occupations.
This is now a permanent Occupation and is placed face-up
before the start of all subsequent games without requiring any
Action to be used. You can use the abilities of the Occupation
card from the start of the game, just as though you had already
played it. Each subsequent game, you choose another played
Occupation to be added to your permanent Occupations. Reduce
the number of cards in your Occupations hand by the number of
permanent Occupations that you have, so that you have a total of
seven Occupation cards at the start of each Solo game. Once an
Occupation has been made permanent, it must be placed face-up
at the start of each subsequent game in the series.
Because you have more permanent Occupations after each
game, the goal score that you must reach goes up in each game:
In the first game, your goal is 50 points, then 55, 59, 62, 64, 65,
66 and 67 points. After the eighth game, the Solo game series is
over. (You can of course play on with all permanent Occupation
cards, in which case the goal score increases by 1 point per
game.) At the start of each game in the series, you receive 1 food
for every 2 points by which you exceeded the goal score for the
previous game (rounded down). Any cards from the previous
game that were not moved to the permanent Occupations are
shuffled into the deck.
Many Solo players enjoy choosing their own cards  even
determining the order of the Round cards. You can also try
the following three "contests": restrict your Occupation and
Improvement cards to only one of Deck E, I or K.

APPENDIX:
This appendix consists of 8 sections:
1. The Action spaces 9
2. Major Improvements 10
3. Minor Improvements 10
4. Occupation cards 11
5. Counters & Tokens 12
6. Variant 12
7. Cards played during a Harvest 12
8. Credits 12
1. The Action Spaces
Some actions are printed directly on the game boards (1 .1) and others are on cards. Each
round during the game, a new Round card (1.2) is drawn. Depending on the number of players,
up to 6 additional Action cards may be laid out at the start of the game (1.3).
A player may never use an Action space without taking one of the actions shown on the
space.
1.1. Actions that are printed on spaces on the game board
The actions that are printed on the game board are the same each time the game is played.
They vary slightly in the Solo game and in the Family Game variant (see Rules).
Action spaces with an arrow: Players whose Family members use this space take all
the resources, animals or Food that are on the space. Food is found on the Fishing and
Traveling Players spaces and, in the Family Game variant, in the Storehouse. Apart from
these, the Action spaces are named after the goods that are placed on the spaces.
Build Room(s) and/or Stable(s): During the course of the game, each player may build
any number of rooms and at most 4 stables. Pieces must be placed immediately whenever
something is built.
Each stable costs 2 Wood and can be placed on a fenced or empty unfenced farmyard space.
A fenced stable doubles the holding capacity of a pasture. Each farmyard space can hold 1
stable. Each space within a pasture may have its own stable: the pasture's capacity is then
multiplied by 4, 8, etc. An unfenced stable can hold at most 1 animal and may be fenced later.
Building houses is explained fully in the Rules (see Action A). A new room must be
orthogonally adjacent to existing rooms.
Starting player and/or Minor Improvement: The player takes or retains the Starting player
token. He may play one Minor Improvement from his hand
Take 1 Grain: The player takes 1 Grain from the general supply and places it in her own
supply. She may not Sow the Grain immediately, even if she has fallow fields. To Sow it, she
must choose one of the Sow action spaces. (see Appendix section 1.2 and Rules, Action C)
Plow 1 Field: The player places 1 field tile on an unfenced, empty farmyard space of her
choice. If she already has fields, the new field must be orthogonally adjacent to the existing
fields (see Rules, Action C). Players may not un-Plow plowed fields (that is, a player may
never remove a field tile) for any reason.
1 Occupation: The player plays 1 Occupation card from his hand by placing it face-up on
the table and reading it aloud. The first Occupation card a player plays in a game is free; each
additional Occupation card costs 1 Food (see Rules, Occupation and Improvement cards).
Day Laborer: The player takes 2 Food from the general supply in the standard game, or 1
Food and 1 Building resource in the Family Game.
1.2. Action Spaces on the Round cards.
The game is divided into 14 rounds over 6 stages  the first stage lasts for 4 rounds, the
second for 3, the third to fifth for 2 each and the sixth for 1 round. In each round, a new
Action space is added into the game; this can be used in the round in which it is turned up
and in each subsequent round. Each of the 6 stages ends with a Harvest.
The Action spaces are described here in the order of the game stages.
Sow and/or bake bread (Stage 1): For a description of Sowing, see Rules, Action C. When
Sowing, a player need not Sow all her empty fields, some may be left empty. Bake bread
means that the player takes Grain from her supply (she may not use Grain that is on one
of her fields) and uses a Baking Improvement with the symbol to turn it into food. For
example, a Fireplace or Cooking Hearth can turn one Grain into 2 or 3 Food. Various Oven
Improvements allow players to bake Grain into even more food.
1 Major or Minor Improvement (Stage 1): The player may place either a Major or a Minor
Improvement. Major Improvements are shown on the red cards and may be placed by any
player. Minor Improvements are on the orange cards. Minor Improvements are held in a
player's hand  other players do not have access to those cards.
1 Sheep (Stage 1): Place 1 Sheep on this space in the Replenish phase (Phase 2) of each
round. A player who selects this action takes all the Sheep from the Action space and must
either put them into his farmyard (see Rules, Action D) or use an Improvement to turn them
into Food. Sheep that cannot be pastured or turned into Food are returned to the general
supply.
Fences (Stage 1): Fences cost 1 Wood per fence. A fence that has been built may not be
demolished. Huts do not create a natural border for a pasture  a pasture must be surrounded
by fences even along the side(s) of a hut, the edges of the game board and beside fields and
stables. A pasture may be divided into several pastures by adding fences (see example).
(Keeping animals in fenced pastures is described in the Rules, Action D).
Example: To the left is a pasture with
a stable. It can hold 8 animals. In the
example to the right, the pasture has been
divided. The first pasture can only hold 2
animals, the second (with the stable) can
hold 4.
1 Stone (Stage 2): This Action space is a normal resource space as described in section 1.1.
In Stage 4 (Rounds 10 & 11), a second Stone space enters the game.
After Renovation, also 1 Major or Minor Improvement (Stage 2): Renovating is
described in the Rules under Action A. A player may only use this space to purchase a Major
or Minor Improvement after Renovating. A player may not undertake both renovations,
from a Wood to a Clay hut and to a Stone house, in one action.
After Family Growth, also 1 Minor Improvement (Stage 2): A player may only use this
Family growth space if he has more empty rooms than Family members. It is irrelevant
how the family has grown before and whether the Family members are on the game board
or in the farmyard. A player may not ignore the Family growth action and only purchase the
Minor Improvement.
A Guest  acquired through a Minor Improvement card  does not count as a Family
member.
Family growth is described in the Rules, Action B; Minor Improvements are described in
section 3 of this Appendix.
Take 1 Vegetable (Stage 3): The player takes 1 Vegetable from the general supply and
places it in her own supply. As with Grain, the player may not immediately Sow the
Vegetable. To Sow Vegetables, she must later place a Family member on one of the Sow
Action spaces.
1 Wild Boar (Stage 3): This Action space is the same as the 1 Sheep Round card, but
instead of a sheep it adds a Wild boar to the game.
1 Stone (Stage 4): This is a normal building resource space (see above).
1 Cattle (Stage 4): This action space is the same as the 1 Sheep Round card, but instead of a
Sheep it adds a Cattle to the game.
Plow and/or Sow 1 field (Stage 5): The player who takes this action may Plow one field
and after that may also Sow: he may plant Grain or Vegetables from his personal supply into
any empty field on his farmyard (See Rules, Action C). A player need not Sow all his fields;
some may be left empty.
Family Growth even without a room (Stage 5): Unlike the other Family Growth card, this
is not dependent on the number of rooms. By using this action three times, a player could
possibly have 5 Family members in only 2 rooms. Note: If a player who uses this card later
extends her home, she may not use the other Family Growth card again until she has more
rooms than Family members: the new rooms must first be used for Family members that did
10
not previously have their own room.
After Renovation, also Fences (Stage 6): Round 14 is the only round of the game in which
there are 2 Renovation actions (so that more than one player can build a Stone house). A
player must Renovate to be allowed to Fence pastures. Players may never perform both
renovations (to a Clay hut and to a Stone house) with one action.
1.3. Special Action spaces that vary according to the number of players.
In a 3-5 player game, additional Action spaces ensure that there are enough actions available
for all the players. Those that do not simply award Building materials or food are described
here.
1 Occupation (3 players): A player who chooses this action may play 1 Occupation
card from his hand. This Occupation costs 2 Food, so is much more expensive than the
Occupations on the other Occupation Action space (see Appendix 1.1).
Take 1 Reed, 1 Stone and 1 Food (4 players): The player takes 1 Reed, 1 Stone and 1 Food
from the general supply and places them in his personal supply.
1 Occupation (4 players): A player who chooses this action may play 1 Occupation card
from his hand. If this is the player's first or second Occupation card, it costs 1 food, a
subsequent Occupation card costs 2 food.
Take 1 Reed, also 1 Stone and 1 Wood (5 players): 1 Reed is placed on this action space
each round. In addition, when a player takes this Action, he also takes 1 Stone and 1 Wood
from the general supply (Stone and Wood do not build up on this space over several rounds).
In a 5-player game, there are three action spaces on which a player must choose one of two
or more options. The restriction of only one Family member on any action space still applies
to these spaces: by taking an action, a player prevents other players from taking the other
actions on that card.
Take animals (5 players): A player who chooses this Action space has three
choices: Take 1 Sheep and 1 Food; Take 1 Wild Boar; or pay 1 Food for 1 Cattle.
The animal is taken from the general supply and is immediately placed in the
player's farmyard or turned into Food using an appropriate Occupation (e.g.
Butcher, Meat Seller) or an Improvement with the symbol).
Either 1 Occupation or, from Round 5, Family Growth (5 players): The player
may play an Occupation card from her hand. If this is the player's first or second
Occupation card, it costs 1 Food, a subsequent Occupation card costs 2 Food. From the start
of Round 5, a player may choose to take Family Growth instead of an Occupation.
Build 1 Room or Traveling Players (5 players): A player choosing this Action space may
either build a room or use the Traveling Players. Unlike the other Building space, this action
can only be used to build a single room. Each round, 1 Food is placed on the Traveling
Players space. If a player chooses the Building action, the Food remains on the Action
space. The Food cannot be taken by another player in this round because the Action space is
occupied.
2. Major Improvements
There are 10 Major Improvement cards. These have their own board, on which the cards are
laid out. Each Major Improvement card has its own place on the board. Once all but one of
the Major Improvements have been sold, the board is flipped to the reverse side, which has
an overview of scoring. There is a space for the tenth Major Improvement card on this side
of the board; it may still be bought.
Fireplaces and Cooking Hearths: A player may own several Fireplaces and Cooking
Hearths. The two Fireplaces only differ in their price. There is an inexpensive one for 2
Clay and an expensive one for 3 Clay. Similarly, the two Cooking Hearths are identical
except for their cost (4 Clay/5 Clay). A player who chooses the Major Improvement action
may upgrade a Fireplace to a Cooking Hearth by taking a Cooking Hearth and returning
the Fireplace to the Major Improvements board, where it is available for purchase again.
Fireplaces and Cooking Hearths are worth 1 VP each. They make Vegetables worth more
than 1 Food, and can turn animals into Food. They also allow the player to use the Bake
bread Action space (see Appendix section 1.2) to make Grain more valuable. The difference
between a Fireplace and a Cooking Hearth is that the Cooking Hearth produces 1 more Food
from Baking bread and from cooking Vegetables, Wild Boar and Cattle.
Clay Oven and Stone Oven: These allow players to Bake bread more efficiently and are
worth 2 and 3 VP respectively. Players may Bake bread as a one-time action immediately
after they have bought an Oven.
The Ovens cost 3 Clay and 1 Stone / 1 Clay and 3 Stone. Some Minor Improvements allow
them to be upgraded to a more efficient Baking improvement.
The Joinery, Pottery and Basketmaker's Workshop offer an additional scoring
opportunity for Wood, Clay and Reed. In each Harvest, up to 1 of the corresponding
Building resource may be converted into 2 or 3 Food (depending on the card). At the end of
the game, players with these cards earn up to 3 Bonus points for having several of the same
resource. These workshops each cost 2 Stone plus 2 Wood, Clay or Reed. At the end of the
game, each workshop is worth 2VP.
The Well provides 1 food for each of up to 5 Rounds. More importantly, the Well is worth 4
VP at the end of the game. The Well costs 3 Stone and 1 Wood.
3. Minor Improvements
The 169 "Occupation" cards (see Appendix, section 5) and the 139 "Minor Improvement"
cards are divided into three decks. This section clarifies questions about some of the Minor
Improvement cards. The following letters are used to indicate the deck that a card belongs to
(The decks may be combined with one another):
E Basic deck
I Interactive deck
K Complex deck
Many Improvements are worth Victory Points. They may also offer the opportunity to earn
Bonus points. The basic point value is shown as a number on the left side of the card.
The following abbreviations are used in the card descriptions:
B Cards that offer Bonus points
U Upgrade cards
T Traveling cards (pass to the player on the left after play)
AS One Minor Improvement, the Tavern, is available to all players as
an Action space
FS Cards that function as a Farmyard space
Acreage (K, FS): Players who receive 4 Grain on fields when Sowing (through Occupations
like the Fieldsman and Smallholder) can also receive 4 Grain on the Acreage.
Alms (I, T): The current round is not a "completed" round.
Animal Feed (I): When acquiring this card, it is irrelevant whether the fields are planted
with Grain or Vegetables. A player may return animals to the supply in order to make room
for the new arrivals.
Bakehouse (K, 5, U): The Baker's Kitchen may not be upgraded to a Bakehouse.
Baker's Kitchen (I, 4, U): see Bakehouse.
Bean Field (E, 1, FS): May be combined with the Potato Dibber, Fieldsman and
Smallholder.
Boar Breeding (K, T): The Wild boar may immediately be converted into Food, using an
Improvement with the symbol or an appropriate Occupation.
Bread Paddle (K): May be used with the Puppeteer and the Educator.
Bookshelf (K, 1): When used with the Writing Desk to play two Occupation cards, the
additional 3 Food are distributed twice (once for each card). The Patron gives an additional
2 Food.
Brushwood Roof (K, 1): The player may mix Wood and Reed when building a new room.
Instead of 2 Reed, he may use 1 Wood and 1 Reed.
Cattle Market (E, T): The cattle may immediately be converted into Food, using an
Improvement with the symbol or an appropriate Occupation.
Chicken Coop (I, 1): May either be built with 2 Wood & 1 Reed or with 2 Clay & 1 Reed.
Clay Roof (E, 1): Players may mix Clay and Reed when building. Instead of 2 Reed, a
player may use 1 Clay & 1 Reed.
Clay Supports (E): A Clay Support is a support used in preparing a Clay wall. A player is
allowed to build 1 room for 5 Clay & 2 Reed and an additional room for 2 Clay, 1 Wood & 1
Reed in the same turn. The Clay Supports may not be combined with the Axe, Carpenter or
the Clay Plasterer.
Clogs (E): This card is worth 2 points even if the player receives Bonus points for the Halftimbered
House or the Mansion. May be combined with the Chief's Daughter.
Copse (I, 1, FS): Players who receive 4 Grain on fields when Sowing can also grow 4 Wood
once or twice in the Copse. Harvest the Wood during the Harvest.
Corn Storehouse (I, 1): This is built with either 2 Wood & 1 Reed or 2 Clay & 1 Reed. Use
the Corn Storehouse during the Harvest at the same time as the Watermill and the Harvest
Helper.
Crooked Plow (K, 1): A player may choose to only Plow 2 fields instead of 3 at once. Place
1 field tile on the card to show that the Plow may be used 1 more time. Each time a player
selects the Plow 1 Field action, s/he may only use 1 plow.
Field (E, T): The Harrow and Plows may not be used with the Field.
Fish Trap (I): The Fish Trap does not earn additional food for the Reed Exchange, Helpful
Neighbors, Reed Buyer and Reed Collector cards.
Flagon (I): If the Well is rebuilt after the Village Well upgrade, the Food is distributed again.
If both the Village Well and the Well have been played when the Flagon is played, the Food
is distributed twice.
Forest Pasture (K, 1, FS): The Wild boar on this card are included when scoring Wild boar.
Granary (K, 1): A player may not build the Granary with 2 Wood & 1 Clay or with 1 Wood
& 2 Clay. The Granary may not be combined with the Grain Cart, Corn Scoop, Pieceworker,
Sycophant, Seed Seller, Greengrocer, Market Crier or Field Watchman.
Greenhouse (K, 1): If the player does not wish to pay the 1 Food to buy the
Vegetables, the Vegetable token is returned to the general supply.
Guest (I, T): To show the Guest, take a Claim marker and turn it over to show
the word Guest. The Guest counts as an additional Family member. A player who
already has 5 Family members can use the Guest to play one round with 6. A Guest
is not counted in checking whether there is enough room in the home.
Gypsy's Crock (E, 1): A player who converts 4 goods at once receives 2 additional Food,
for 6 Goods, 3 additional Food, etc.
Half-timbered House (E, B): If a player does not Renovate to a Stone house or if the player
has also played the Mansion, there is no advantage.
Harrow (I): Other players that use the Harrow may only Plow 2 fields at once if they
place one Family member on one of the Plow 1 field Action spaces. The Harrow cannot be
combined with any of the Plows. The owner of the Harrow may not deny other players the
right to use it.
Holiday House (I, 8): This costs either 3 Wood & 2 Reed or 3 Clay & 2 Reed. The player
may not add a Clay Roof, Brushwood Roof or Straw-thatched Roof when building this. The
owner of this card does not participate in the Work Phase (Phase 3) in round 14  but s/he
can still profit from the "Start the Round" phase (Phase 1).
House Goat (K, 1): The goat was the first domesticated animal in the history of the human
race. Place 1 Food for each remaining Harvest on this card, to ensure that the Food is
not forgotten. A player cannot choose to let the Goat run free in order to make room for a
different animal in his or her house.
Lasso (I): Once the owner of this card has had a turn during the "Work" phase (Phase 3) and
has placed 2 Family members, she can place her third Family member as soon as she has her
second turn. Players cannot place more than two people at a time with the Lasso. A player
with 4 or 5 Family members may use the Lasso twice in the same round.
Lettuce Patch (E, 1, FS): To receive the 4 Food for Harvested Vegetables, the player must
convert the Vegetables to Food immediately after Harvesting. See also: Turnip Field.
Liquid Manure (K): Fields that have already been planted when the card is played will only
benefit from the Liquid Manure when they are emptied and replanted. Liquid Manure may
be combined with a Corn Storehouse, Potato Dibber, Planter Box, Bean Field, Turnip Field,
Lettuce Patch, Fieldsman and Smallholder.
Manure (I): The owner of the Manure has a Field phase (Harvest phase 1) after each round .
Outside a regular Harvest time, the Milking Shed, Spindle, Butter Churn, Milking Stool and
Loom do not earn any additional Food.
Market Stall (E, T): The Market Stall may not be combined with the Pieceworker but may
be combined with the Market Woman. A player with no Grain in the Supply may not use the
Market Stall, even in combination with the Market Woman.
Milking Shed (I, 2): Pets and live Animals on Improvement cards are also counted with the
animals in the farmyard. At Harvest time, the Milking Shed is processed before the Spindle,
Butter Churn, Milking Stool and Loom.
Millstone (E): With the Baker, the player receives at most 2 additional Food in each Harvest.
Mini Pasture (E, T): The new pasture must border an existing pasture. The Mini Pasture
may be combined with the Hedge Keeper, Farmer, Stablehand and Animal Breeder.
Moldboard Plow (I, 1): Place 2 field tiles on this card to show that the Plow may be used 2
times.
Potato Dibber (E): May be combined with Beanfield, Turnip Field and Lettuce Patch.
Punner (I): Unless another player Plows more than one field on his/her action, the player
with the Punner may not take a field with it.
Reed Exchange (I, T): A player may not exchange 1 Wood or 1 Clay for only 1 Reed, or
exchange 1 Wood and 1 Clay for 2 Reed.
Reed Hut (K, 1): The person in the Reed Hut is not counted when calculating whether
Family Growth is allowed. They do not count as part of the family.
Riding Plow (E, 2): A player may choose to only Plow 2 fields at once instead of 3. Place 2
field tiles on the card to show that the plow may be used 2 more times. Each time a player
selects the Plow 1 Field action, s/he may only use 1 Plow.
Sawhorse (K): A player that can already put those fences up at no cost cannot save the free
fences for another turn.
Shepherd's Crook (I): If, for example, a pasture of size 5 or 6 is divided into a pasture of
size 4, this does not count as "newly fenced" and it does not receive the 2 Sheep.
Shepherd's Pipe (E): May not be combined with the Stablemaster.
Sleeping Corner (K, 1): This can be used with either of the Family Growth actions.
Spinney (I, 1): When the owner of the Spinney demands the 1 Wood from another player,
the other player is entitled to change her mind & select a different action instead  it is easy
to overlook the Spinney.
Stone Exchange (K, T): A player may not exchange 1 Wood or 1 Clay for only 1 Stone, or
exchange 1 Wood and 1 Clay for 2 Stone.
Swing Plow (K, 1): A player may choose to only Plow 2 fields instead of 3 at once. Place
2 field tiles on the card to show how many times the Plow may be used. Each time a player
selects the Plow 1 Field action, she may only use 1 plow.
Turnip field (K, 1, FS): May be combined with the Potato Dibber, Fieldsman and
Smallholder.
Turnwrest Plow (E, 1): A player may choose to only Plow 2 fields at once instead of 3.
Place 1 field tile on the card to show that the Plow may be used 1 more time. Each time a
player selects the Plow 1 field action, she may only use 1 plow.
Weekly Market (I, T): The Weekly Market may be combined with the Market Woman but
not with the Pieceworker.
Wood Cart (I): The Wood Cart may not be used with the 1 Reed, also 1 Stone and 1 Wood
action space in the 5-player game.
Wooden Crane (I, 1): The Wooden Crane may not be used on the Take 1 Reed, 1 Stone
and 1 Food space from the 4-player game or the Reed, also 1 Stone and 1 Wood from the
5-player game.
Village Well (I, 5, U): The Well gives 1 Food per round for 5 rounds. These Food remain
on the board even when the 3 additional Food from the Village Well are distributed, and are
distributed again if the Well is purchased a second time.
4. The Occupation cards
This section clarifies questions about some of the occupation cards. The following
abbreviations have been used:
E Basic deck
I Interactive deck
K Complex deck (The decks may be combined with one another).
B Cards that offer Bonus points
AS Cards that function as an Action space
FS Cards that function as an additional Farmyard space
The number range shows the number of players that the card may be used with (1-5, 3-5 or
4-5).
Acrobat (K, 4-5): If the Acrobat uses the Traveling Players Action space, he should place
Claim markers on any unused Take 1 Grain, Plow 1 field and Plow 1 field and/or Sow
Action spaces as a reminder that these may be claimed later.
Adoptive Parents (K, 1-5): A player must pay 2 Food instead of 1 for an adoptive child,
even if it was adopted immediately before the Harvest.
Animal Dealer (I, 3-5): In the 5-player game, there is an Action space which gives Players
1 animal of their choice. The Animal Dealer cannot take an additional animal. See also:
Animal handler.
Animal Handler (K, 4-5): By paying 1 Food, a player may immediately convert the animal
into Food. The 1 Food may not be taken from the proceeds.
Animal Tamer (K, 1-5): No effect after acquisition of a House Goat.
Basin Maker (K, 4-5, B): Slaughtered Wild boar may either be placed on the Tanner or used
for the Basin Maker, not both
Berry Picker (E, 3-5): This card is activated by the Action space 1 Reed, in addition 1
Stone and 1 Wood that is used in a 5-player game and also by the Building Materials Minor
Improvement card.
Businessman (I, 3-5): In conjunction with the Traveling Salesman, up to 3 Minor
Improvements may be played one after another using the Starting Player Action space.
In conjunction with the Merchant, first 1 Minor Improvement and 1 Minor or Major
Improvement and then additionally, for 1 Food, either 2 Minor Improvements or 1 Major and
1 Minor Improvements may be played using the Starting Player Action space.
Carpenter (E, 1-5): May not be combined with the Axe or with the Clay Plasterer.
Charcoal Burner (E, 3-5): The player can place 1 Food and 1 Wood on the unbuilt Major
Improvements with the symbol, to remind her to take the tokens.
Chief (E, 1-5, B): The third point per room is scored as Bonus points (see the Bonus point
symbol). The Chief may be combined with the Half-timbered House as well as with the
Mansion.
Clay Worker (K, 1-5): In a 5-player game, there is an Action space on which the player
always receives 1 Wood in addition to any other resources. The Clay worker also receives 1
additional Clay on this space.
Conservator (E, 1-5): May not be combined with the Stone Breaker. The Renovation is paid
as usual, with 1 Stone per room plus 1 Reed.
Countryman (K, 4-5): If the player chooses either the Take 1 Grain or Take 1 Vegetable
action, he places Claim markers on the empty Sowing spaces to show that he has a claim.
There are 2 Sowing Action spaces. The second Round card with this action appears during
Stage V.
Cowherd (I, 3-5): In the 5-player game, there is an Action space which gives players 1
animal of their choice. The Cowherd cannot take an additional Cattle token on this space.
Farm Steward (I, 1-5): Allows at most 1 Family Growth without space in the Hut.
Farmer (E, 4-5): The player only receives 1 new animal, even if several Pastures are created
with the same action.
Fence Builder (I, 1-5): From now on, the player has only 14 fences for building. Building
fences always follows all other actions on the Action space.
Fence Deliveryman (I, 1-5): Fences may not be removed from the Round space to build
them in the usual way. A player who only wishes to build 1-3 fences still pays 2 Food. A
player who chooses not to build any fences or not to build as many as were possible returns
the leftover fences to her own supply of unbuilt fences. A player may not leave a pasture
open.
Fence Overseer (K, 1-5): May be combined with Farmer, Animal Breeder, Stablehand and
Groom. Used with the Stablehand, it is possible to build fences, receiving 1 free stable that
could then be fenced for free. The player does not then receive a second stable, as only 1 free
stable is awarded in each action. Combined with the Groom: First the player puts up 1 stable,
then he surrounds it with fences.
Fieldsman (I, 1-5): May be combined with the Forester, Copse, Lettuce Patch, Beanfield,
Turnip Field and Acreage.
Field Guard (E, 4-5): see Head of the Family.
Field Watchman (I, 1-5): Plows and the Harrow cannot be used with the Field Watchman.
Field Worker (I, 3-5): The Field Worker is also activated when a Player uses the Corn
Storehouse.
Foreman (K, 4-5): Wood Distributor, Foreman and Taster can affect one another. A player
who decides to use the Occupation cannot take back the decision. A player who does not
wish to use the Occupation has until the start of the Work phase (Phase 3) to reconsider.
Forester (K, 1-5, FS): A player who may grow 4 Grain on a field, (eg. through an
Occupation) also grows 4 Wood on the Copse (1-3 times); a player who could grow 5 Grain
grows 5 Wood. A player with the Fieldsman receives a total of 5 piled Wood for a new Wood
planting, for 2 new Wood plantings she receives 4 Wood each.
Gardener (I, 1-5): All the player's Vegetable patches remain untouched until the end of the
game. This also applies to the Beanfield, Turnip Field and Lettuce Patch.
Groom (I, 4-5): Wood that the player receives at the same time through a Private Forest,
Wood Collector or Wood Deliveryman may immediately be used to build 1 stable.
Harvest Helper (I, 3-5): A player may not take the additional Grain from one of his own
fields. The Corn Storehouse has precedence over the Harvest Helper. The Harvest Helper
may take the Grain from the Acreage Minor Improvement.
Head of the Family (E, 4-5): A player may not use the same Action space in the same round
with 2 of her own Family Members.
Hedge Cutter (E, 1-5): May be combined with the Fence Overseer, Fence Builder and
Fence Deliveryman as well as with the Farmer, Stablehand, Wood Carver and Sawhorse.
Hut Builder (E, 4-5): When the card is played, place a hut tile on the Action space for round
11.
Layabout (I, 1-5): The player does not participate in any part of the next Harvest, including
harvesting fields, breeding animals and feeding his or her family.
Lover (K, 3-5): If a player builds a room after the Lover has had Offspring, the Offspring
occupies the new room. It is better to first build the room, then take a normal Family Growth
action and only then use the Lover.
Market Woman (K, 1-5): The Market Woman may be combined with the Greenhouse,
Market Stall and Weekly Market. She may not be combined with Occupations. If the player
who has played the Market Woman also has the Market Stall or Weekly Market, he must first
give up Grain in order to get it back.
Mason (E, 1-5): The player may place a room tile on the Occupation card to show that he
has not yet taken the Extension action.
Merchant (E, 1-5): A player using the 1 Major or Minor Improvement Action space
can play either 2 Major or 2 Minor Improvements or 1 Major and 1 Minor Improvement.
In conjunction with the Traveling Salesman it is possible to acquire up to 4 Minor
Improvements, or to acquire 2 Major Improvements using the 1 Minor Improvement
and paying 1 Food. In conjunction with the Businessman, first 1 Minor Improvement
and 1 Minor or Major Improvement and then additionally, for 1 Food, either 2 Minor
Improvements or 1 Major and 1 Minor Improvements may be played using the Starting
Player Action space.
Net Fisherman (I, 1-5): When the Player places 1 Family member on an Action space with
Reed, he stakes his claim to fish by placing a Claim marker.
Parvenu (I, 4-5): The player receives the Stone immediately after Renovating, so can use
them immediately for the accompanying Improvement.
Pieceworker (K, 1-5): The Pieceworker can only buy goods in the "Work" phase (Phase 3)
 not at the start of a round (Phase 1). The Pieceworker only affects goods that are earned
directly through an Action space, not through Improvements and Occupations.
Plow Driver (E, 1-5): May not be combined with any of the 5 Plows or the Harrow.
Plow Maker (E, 1-5): Unlike the Plow Driver, the Plow Maker may be combined with a
Plow or the Harrow.
Plowman (K, 1-5): If the player chooses not to take a field, the field is returned to the
general Supply.
Puppeteer (I, 4-5): The Puppeteer may only play Occupation cards if she has Food  even if
the card would provide Food immediately.
Reed Buyer (I, 4-5): If the Player takes Reed, he does not receive additional Food from the
general supply. The Other player may not refuse the Reed purchase. The Reed Buyer cannot
interfere if Reed is taken for the second time in a Round.
Resource Seller (K, 1-5): Resources may be bought at the start of the round (Phase 1) as
well as in the Work phase (phase 3). It is possible to buy more than 1 resource from the
Resource Seller by using Occupation cards like the Wood Distributor, Storekeeper or Clay
Worker.
Schnaps Distiller (K, 1-5): The Player does not require a Fireplace, Cooking Hearth or
Oven to convert the Vegetables.
Scholar (K, 1-5): The Bookshelf, Perpetual Student and Patron can be used with the Scholar.
Each round, the Scholar allows a player to play up to 1 additional card.
Sheep Farmer (K, 3-5): There is an additional animal space in the 5-player game. The
Sheep Farmer can affect this space. The Sheep Farmer may not be combined with the
Shepherd Boy, Animal Handler, Sheep Whisperer or Master Shepherd.
12
Shepherd Boy (K, 4-5): The player does not receive a free Sheep for the current round. The
free Sheep may be immediately transformed into Food with an appropriate Improvement.
Smallholder (K, 1-5): May be combined with the Drinking Trough and the Shepherd's
Pipe. Copse, Acreage, Beanfield, Turnip Field and Lettuce Patch do not count towards the
indicated maximum of 2 fields. Neither those nor the Forester may be combined with the
Smallholder.
Stable Hand (E, 1-5): Stable Hand and Fence Overseer can be combined. It would be
possible to build fences, receiving 1 free stable that could then be fenced for free. The player
does not then receive a second stable.
Stablemaster (E, 1-5): The Stablemaster and the Shepherd's Pipe may not be used together.
Stone Breaker (K, 4-5): May not be combined with the Conservator.
Stone Buyer (I, 4-5): If the Player takes Stone, she does not receive additional Food from
the general Supply. The Other player may not refuse the Stone purchase. The Stone Buyer
cannot interfere if Stone is taken for the second or third time in a Round.
Stone Cutter (E, 3-5): If e.g. the Lumber card is played, the player need not give up any
Stone.
Sycophant (I, 4-5): Note that there are enough cards in the I deck for the other players to
avoid the Take 1 Grain Action space.
Tanner (K, 3-5, B): Slaughtered Wild Boar may either be placed on the Tanner or used for
the Basin Maker, not both.
Taster (I, 4-5): If e.g. the right-hand neighbor of the Taster is the Starting player, the Taster
pays him 1 Food and places her first person. The Starting player then places the second, the
third person is then played by the player who played the Taster (due to the normal flow of
the game). See also: Foreman.
Traveling Salesman (K, 1-5): In conjunction with the Merchant, it is possible to acquire up
to 4 Minor Improvements using the 1 Major or Minor Improvement space for 1 Food, or
to acquire 2 Major Improvements using the 1 Minor Improvement for 1 Food. In conjunction
with the Businessman, up to 3 Minor Improvements may be played using the Starting
Player Action.
Tutor (E, 1-5, B): The player may note the Bonus points immediately on his scoring pad, or
may also simply lay out his Occupations in the order that he plays them.
Veterinarian (K, 4-5): If the player draws 2 different animals, both are returned to the
container. If the animals are the same, the player may immediately convert the animal s/he
receives into Food. If you are playing with Wooden animals, take Stone, Reed and Wood
tokens for drawing and take one animal of the appropriate color.
Water Carrier (I, 1-5): Food is not distributed a second time when the Well is upgraded to
the Village Well. It is distributed again if the Well is built for a second time.
Well Builder (I, 1-5): After the upgrade to the Village Well, the Well may be built a second
time. The benefits of the Well builder also apply the second time.
Wet Nurse (K, 1-5): Players are allowed to build several rooms at once with the Build
Room(s) action. For 2 Food, the Wet Nurse allows an immediate Family Growth of 2
people, for 3 Food 3 people. The new Family members are placed on top of the Family
member that was placed on the Build Room(s) Action space. The newborns are available to
take actions in the following round.
Wood Buyer (I, 3-5): The card also applies to the 1 Reed, in addition 1 Stone and 1 Wood
Action space that is used in a 5-player game.
Wood Carver (K, 1-5): May only be used once in each Round. The player can place her
Wood supply on the Wood Carver card, to ensure that she does not forget the benefits.
Wood Distributor (K, 1-5): Occupations like Boar Catcher and Mushroom Collector may
mean that there is Wood on the Wood space that cannot be distributed evenly  in this case,
1 or 2 Wood are left on the Action space. The Wood Distributor, Foreman and Taster can
affect one another. A player who chooses to use the Wood Distributor cannot take back the
decision. A player who chooses not to use the Wood Distributor has until the start of the
Work phase (Phase 3) to reconsider.
Woodcutter (E, 1-5): see Wood Buyer.
5. Counters and tokens:
Counters and tokens are described in different ways:
Building resources:
Stone, Reed, Clay, Wood
Resources:
Building resources, Grain, Vegetables
Animals:
Sheep, Wild boar, Cattle
Goods:
All Resources, Animals
6. Variants
* 3:1 Exchange: At any time, a player may discard any 3 cards from his hand and draw the
face-down card at the top of either the Minor Improvements or the Occupations deck. This
card is placed in the player's hand.
* 10-3: Each player draws 10 Occupation and 10 Minor Improvement cards and discards 3
of each.
* Mulligan: At the start of the game (and only at the start), a player may discard all 7
Occupations and/or Minor Improvements and draw 6 new cards of that type. (If the player is
still unhappy, he can keep trying this, always drawing 1 card fewer than he discards).
* Draft: Before the game starts, each player receives a hand of 7 Occupation cards as usual,
then chooses one and passes the rest to her left-hand neighbor. Each player chooses one of
the 6 new cards and passes on the remaining 5. This continues until each player has 7 cards.
Repeat this process with the Minor Improvement cards.
This variant allows players to create better combinations of cards than with a purely random
distribution. We recommend that each player should have played Agricola at least 4-5 times
before trying this variant.
7. Cards played during a Harvest
The Harvest consists of three phases. The Improvement and Occupation cards can divide the
Harvest into up to 11 parts.
Harvest Phase 1: Field Phase
1. Start: Milking Shed.
2. During the phase: Forester, Milking Hand, Copse, Butter Churn, Spindle,
Loom, Milking Stool, Beanfield, Turnip Patch, Lettuce Patch, Acreage.
3. At the end of the phase: Water Mill, Corn Storehouse.
4. Between Phases 1 and 2: Harvest Helper.
Harvest Phase 2: Feeding the Family
5. Start: Baker.
6. During the phase: Cook, Schnaps Distiller, Schnaps Distillery, Master Brewer,
Brewery, Hand Mill, Plane, Spit Roast, House Goat.
7. At the end of the phase: Slaughterman, Slaughterhouse.
8. Between Phases 2 and 3: n/a
Harvest Phase 3: Breeding
9. Start: n/a
10. During the phase: Shepherd, Forest Pasture, Nature Reserve, Animal Yard.
11. At the end of the phase: n/a

CREDITS:
Agricola is a complex development game that was designed between December 2005 and
February 2006.
Game design: Uwe Rosenberg
Graphic design and Illustration: Klemens Franz / atelier198
Editing: Hanno Girke und Uwe Rosenberg
Thanks to the 138 Playtesters of the first edition as well as to the gaming public for the many
comments and compliments after publication, which helped us to improve the game even
further.
Special thanks to the Game Doctor Dale Yu for reviewing the Solo game rules.
The English translation was done by Melissa Rogerson, who thanks Hanno Girke and
William Attia for support and many late-night discussions, her family for their patience, and
John Kennard, Shawn Low, Dale Yu, Zev Shlasinger and the Agricola translators group for
their suggestions and proofing.
 2007 Lookout Games
www.lookout-games.de
English language publisher:
Z-Man Games, Inc.  2008
www.zmangames.com


GAME NAME:
Arkham Horror

OVERVIEW:
The year is 1926, and it is the height of the Roaring
Twenties. Flappers dance till dawn in smoke-filled
speakeasies drinking alcohol supplied by rum runners
and the mob. It's a celebration to end all celebrations in
the aftermath of the War to end all Wars.
Yet a dark shadow grows in the city of Arkham. Alien
entities known as Ancient Ones lurk in the emptiness
beyond space and time, writhing at the gates between
worlds. These gates have begun to open and must be
closed before the Ancient Ones make our world their
ruined dominion.
Only a handful of investigators stand against the
Arkham Horror. Will they prevail?
Arkham Horror is a game for 1 to 8 players (3 to 5
recommended), playable in 2 to 4 hours. The game is set
in the fictional town of Arkham, Massachusetts, made
famous by H.P. Lovecraft in his writings about the
Cthulhu mythos.
In Arkham Horror, a terrible creature from beyond
time and space is waking, roused by the dimensional
gates that are opening all over the city. The players must
join forces to close all of the gates before this Ancient
One awakens. If the Ancient One defeats the players, all
of Arkham is doomed.
The players must work together as a team of investigators
to close all of the dimensional gates, seal them permanently,
or if that fails, defeat the Ancient One when it
awakens from its slumber.
In Arkham Horror, the investigators explore the city,
encountering places, people, and creatures both normal
and mundane. Through these adventures, the investigators
hope to gain the clues and resources needed to confront
and ultimately thwart the mythos threat.
Early in the game, investigators seek to avoid more powerful
monsters while moving around the city to gather
weapons, spells, clues, and other items they will need.
Later, the investigators attempt to close a few gates and
seal some of the most active gates.
Finally, once several gates have been sealed and the
investigators have acquired valuable weapons, spells,
clues, and allies, they make one last, desperate assault on
the mythos, attempting to close or seal the final gates.
Either they succeed and the world survives, or they fail
and the Ancient One awakens for the climactic battle.
Be warned: If the Ancient One awakens, the investigators
are in for the fight of their lives!

COMPONENTS:
- 1 Rule Book (this book)
- 1 Game Board
- 1 First Player Marker
- 5 Dice
- 16 Investigator Sheets
- 16 Investigator Markers
- 16 Plastic Investigator Stands
- 196 Investigator Status Tokens
- 56 Money Tokens
- 34 Sanity Tokens (10 "threes" and 24 "ones")
- 34 Stamina Tokens (10 "threes" and 24 "ones")
- 48 Clue Tokens
- 24 Skill Sliders
- 189 Investigator Cards
- 44 Common Items
- 39 Unique Items
- 40 Spells
- 20 Skills
- 11 Allies
- 35 Special Cards
- 8 Retainers
- 8 Silver Lodge Memberships
- 8 Bank Loans
- 8 Blessing/Curse Cards
- 3 Deputy Cards
- 8 Ancient One Sheets
- 20 Doom Tokens
- 179 Ancient One Cards
- 63 Location Cards
- 67 Mythos Cards
- 49 Gate Cards
- 60 Monster Markers
- 16 Gate Markers
- 3 Activity Markers
- 3 Explored Markers
- 1 Terror Track Marker
- 6 Closed Markers
Before you play your first game of Arkham Horror,
carefully punch out the cardboard pieces so that they do
not tear. Next, slide the 16 plastic stands onto the bases
of the 16 investigator markers. Be sure to keep all components
out of the reach of small children and animals.
The following is an introductory summary of the various
components included in Arkham Horror. This summary
should help you identify the components and understand
the ways they are used as you read through these rules.
Game Board
The game board depicts the city of Arkham and the
"Other Worlds" to which investigators may travel during
the game. See "Game Board Breakdown" on page 21 for
a complete discussion of the game board.
FIRST PLAYER MARKER:
This marker is given to the player
who acts first in a turn. The marker is
passed to the left at the start of each
new turn.
DICE:
Players roll the dice to make skill checks, fight
battles, and determine other random outcomes.

This copy of Arkham Horror is from Fantasy Flight's
second printing of the game. This rulebook has been
revised from the first printing to incorporate the errata
listed in both version 1.1 of the Arkham Horror FAQ
(available at www.fantasyflight games.com) and in the
Dunwich Horror expansion rulebook. Three cards (Flesh
Ward, Healing Stone, and Lantern) and the starting possessions
of two investigators (Bob Jenkins and Jenny
Barnes) and have also been revised according to the
FAQ v1.1 errata. Otherwise, there are no changes to this
version that affect gameplay.
INVESTIGATOR SHEETS AND MARKERS:
Each player receives one investigator
sheet that describes the abilities,
skills, and starting equipment of the
investigator he controls. Each player
also receives one investigator
marker used to indicate his investigator's
current position on the
board. See "Investigator Sheet
Breakdown" on page 21 for a full
description of investigator sheets.
INVESTIGATOR STATUS TOKENS:
These tokens are used to track an investigator's current
Skills, Sanity, Stamina, Money, and Clues.
Skill sliders track the investigator's current
skill levels. Investigators make skill checks
throughout the game in the course of their
adventures.
Sanity tokens represent an investigator's
current level of mental health.
Stamina tokens represent an investigator's
current level of physical health.
Clue tokens represent vital insights and
information an investigator has accumulated
either before or during the game.
Investigators can spend Clue tokens to gain
bonuses on skill checks or to permanently
seal gates.
Money tokens represent the investigator's
current wealth. They are spent to purchase
equipment, pay fines, etc.
INVESTIGATOR CARDS:
The small cards included in Arkham Horror are called
investigator cards. They represent useful allies the investigators
may meet and items they may acquire during the
course of the game. There are six types of investigator
cards:
Common Items are ordinary but useful items that can
aid an investigator.
Unique Items are unusual, sometimes bizarre, and possibly
magical items that can greatly assist an investigator.
Elder signs, which can permanently seal gates, are
found in this deck.
Skill cards represent an investigator's abilities. Skill
cards typically either give a bonus to a certain skill or
allow you to roll the dice again when you fail a certain
kind of dice roll. Skill cards are rare and expensive to
acquire.
Spells are magical rituals that an investigator can perform
using the Lore skill.
Allies are people that offer to assist the investigators in
their adventures. Allies are the most powerful investigator
cards and can be found either at Ma's Boarding
House (a location on the game board) or through
encounters at some of the more dangerous and unstable
locations in Arkham.
Special cards represent unique privileges or obligations.
These include Retainers, Silver Twilight Memberships,
Bank Loans, Blessings, Curses, and Deputy of Arkham
cards. Special cards have a wide variety of effects.
ANCIENT ONE SHEETS:
At the beginning of every
game of Arkham Horror,
the players randomly determine
which Ancient One will
threaten the city. An Ancient
One sheet lists the powers,
combat statistics, and worshippers
associated with each
of these alien beings. See
"Ancient One Sheet
Breakdown" on page 19 for
full details.
DOOM TOKENS:
Doom tokens are
placed on the doom
track on the Ancient
One sheet as new
gates open in
Arkham. When the
doom track is filled
up with doom tokens,
the Ancient One awakens!
On the back of each doom token is an elder sign icon.
When an investigator successfully plays an elder sign to
permanently seal a gate, a doom token is removed from
the Ancient One's doom track, flipped over to its elder
sign side, and placed on the sealed location. Sealing a
gate using Clue tokens does not reduce the number of
doom tokens on the Ancient One's doom track in this
manner. For more information on sealing gates with
both elder signs and Clue tokens, see page 17.
ANCIENT ONE CARDS:
The larger cards included with Arkham Horror are
called Ancient One cards. These represent events that take
place within Arkham or the Other Worlds. These events
can include confrontations with monsters, beneficial
encounters, etc. There are three types of Ancient One
cards: Location cards, Gate cards, and Mythos cards.
Location cards represent the encounters that take place at
the various locations in Arkham. Each of the nine neighborhoods
on the game board has a deck of seven cards
dedicated to it, and each card has one encounter for each
of the locations in that neighborhood. For more information
on locations and neighborhoods, see page 21.
Gate cards represent the encounters that take place in
the Other Worlds. Unlike the Location cards, which are
divided into separate decks for each neighborhood, the
Gate cards are all shuffled together into one deck. For
more information on Other Worlds, see pages 89, 21.
Mythos cards depict major events in Arkham. One is
drawn each turn during the Mythos Phase. When a
mythos card is drawn, it has several effects. It identifies
a location where a gate opens, it determines monster
movement in Arkham, and it presents an event that may
affect the investigators. Most mythos cards also list a
location where a Clue token appears.

MONSTER MARKERS:
Monster markers represent the monsters roaming the
streets of Arkham. Each monster has two sides: a movement
side and a combat side. Leave the monster's movement
side face up while it wanders around the board.
When an investigator battles a monster, flip the monster
marker to its combat side. Players may look at either
side of any monster marker at any time. See "Monster
Marker Breakdown" on page 21 for a full description.
GATE MARKERS
These markers are placed on the board to indicate locations
where gates to the Other Worlds have opened.
Each gate marker identifies the Other World it leads to
and includes a modifier to the dice rolls of investigators
attempting to close the gate.
ACTIVITY AND EXPLORED MARKERS:
Activity markers indicate areas on the board where
unusual events are taking place. An explored marker is
placed underneath an investigator's marker after he has
braved the Other World beyond a gate and returned.
TERROR MARKER:
This marker is placed on the terror
track to indicate the mental state and
morale of the townsfolk of Arkham. As
the terror level increases, stores close
and people leave town, eventually
allowing the monsters to overrun the
town completely!
CLOSED MARKERS:
These markers are placed on locations
that have closed, whether because of
the terror level or specific events that
have occurred in the game. Neither
investigators nor monsters can enter
closed locations.
Activity Marker Explored Marker

GAME SETUP:
Place the Mythos-related items
on one end of the board. These
should include:
9 Location Decks
Gate Deck
Mythos Deck
Ancient One Sheet and Doom
Tokens
Gate Markers
Monster Markers (in an
opaque container)
Clue Tokens
Activity, Closed, and Explored
Markers
Place the Investigator-related
items on one end of the board.
This should include:
Ally, Common Item, Unique
Item, Spell, and Skill Decks
Special Investigator Card
Decks
Sanity and Stamina Token
Bank
Money Token Bank
Give the first player marker to
the player you've chosen to go
first. It is passed to the left at
the end of every turn.
Each player takes his investigator sheet and marker, then
gains Stamina and Sanity tokens equal to his maximum
Stamina and Sanity, respectively. In addition, each player
receives his character's possessions. Finally, each player
places his investigator marker on the game board on his
character's home location.
Place one Clue token on each of
the 11 unstable locations on the
board (marked by a red diamond
above the location).
Movement Side Combat Side
Follow the steps below to prepare for a game of
Arkham Horror.
1. PREPARE PLAYING AREA
Unfold the board and place it in the center of the playing
area. Make sure there is ample space around the
edges of the board to place the investigator sheets and
card decks. Place the various tokens and the dice near
the board, as shown in the setup diagram on page 4.
Make sure to place the terror track marker on the "0"
space on the terror track.
2. PLACE INITIAL CLUES
Place one Clue token on each location on the board that
has a red diamond above it. These locations are unstable
and represent the places where dimensional gates can
open and monsters can appear. Locations are identified
by circular illustrations overlaying the Arkham portion
of the game board (for example, Silver Twilight Lodge
and Ma's Boarding House).
3. CHOOSE FIRST PLAYER
Select one player at random to be the first player. Give
the first player marker to that player.
4. DETERMINE INVESTIGATORS
The first player shuffles the 16 investigator sheets. Then,
without looking, he randomly deals out one investigator
sheet in front of each player, including himself.
Alternately, the players may agree to choose their investigators,
starting with the first player and continuing
clockwise until every player has selected an investigator.
5. REVEAL ANCIENT ONE
The first player shuffles the eight Ancient One sheets.
Then, without looking, he selects one at random and
places it face up near the board. This is the Ancient One
that is threatening Arkham for this game. If the Ancient
One's ability lists any actions that take place at the start
of the game, such as Nyarlathotep's "Thousand Masks"
ability, they are resolved now.
Alternatively, the players may choose which Ancient
One they face. This is often helpful if there are time
constraints or other considerations involved. (Yig makes
for a shorter game, for instance, while Cthulhu makes
for a particularly challenging game.)
6. SEPARATE DECKS
Separate the various investigator and Ancient One cards
into their respective decks and place them near the board
as shown in the setup diagram.
7. RECEIVE FIXED POSSESSIONS
On each investigator sheet, certain items may be listed as
fixed possessions. Each player, beginning with the first
player and continuing clockwise, now receives the items
listed on his investigator sheet in the "Fixed Possessions"
area. The first player should locate the appropriate cards
in the investigator decks and pass them out to the players,
as noted on their investigator sheets.
8. SHUFFLE INVESTIGATOR DECKS
The players shuffle the Common Item, Unique Item,
Spell, and Skill decks, then return them face down to their
places next to the board. Whenever players draw cards,
they draw them randomly from the tops of these decks.
9. RECEIVE RANDOM POSSESSIONS
Each investigator sheet may indicate that the investigator
receives one or more random possessions. Each player,
beginning with the first player and continuing clockwise,
draws the indicated number of cards from the
appropriate decks, as listed on his investigator sheet in
the "Random Possessions" area.
Note: Abilities that affect drawing cards from the card
decks, such as Monterey Jack's Archaeology ability, do
work when drawing random possessions at the start of
the game.
10. FINISH INVESTIGATOR SETUP
Each player now receives a number of Sanity tokens
equal to his investigator's Sanity value and a number of
Stamina tokens equal to his investigator's Stamina
value. These values are listed on each investigator sheet.
Each player should place these tokens near the appropriate
area on his sheet.
Each player also receives three skill sliders and places
one skill slider on each of his three skill tracks. Each
skill slider may be placed on any one of the four "stops"
of each skill track. See "Adjusting Skills" on page 6 for
more information on skill sliders and skill tracks.
11. CREATE MONSTER CUP
Place the monster markers in an opaque container and
randomize them. A coffee cup, plastic container, or cloth
bag works well for this purpose. Throughout these rules,
we'll refer to this container as the monster cup. When a
monster appears or otherwise enters play, the first player
draws a monster marker randomly from the monster cup
and places it on the game board as instructed in these
rules or in the text of a specific card.
Exception: Do not place the five "Mask" monsters in the
container unless Nyarlathotep is the Ancient One. If any
other Ancient One has been revealed, remove the Mask
monsters from the game (simply return the markers to the
box). Mask monsters are identified by the word "Mask"
printed on the combat side of their markers.
12. SHUFFLE ANCIENT ONE
DECKS AND GATE MARKERS
The players now shuffle the Gate and Mythos decks, and
then return them to their places next to the board. Next,
they shuffle the 16 Gate markers and place them face
down in a stack next to the board.
13. PLACE INVESTIGATOR
MARKERS
Each player now takes the investigator marker depicting
his investigator and places the marker on the game
board location indicated on his investigator sheet in the
"Home" area. The other investigator sheets and markers,
as well as the unused Ancient One sheets, may now be
removed from the game.
14. DRAW AND RESOLVE
MYTHOS CARD
Finally, the first player draws the top card of the mythos
deck and resolves it as described in the Mythos Phase
section of the rules. If a Rumor is drawn, discard it and
draw again until you draw a mythos card that isn't a
Rumor. The mythos card will indicate an unstable location
where a gate and monster appear. Remember, unstable
locations are identified by red diamonds on the game
board. For more information on resolving the Mythos
Phase, see page 9.
Important: Remember to place a doom token on the
Ancient One's doom track after the first gate opens.
After the mythos card has been completely resolved, the
first turn begins, starting with the first player.
A turn in Arkham Horror is divided into five phases.
During each phase, every player, starting with the
first player and continuing clockwise, performs the
actions that take place during that phase. Once all
players have completed a phase, the next phase begins.
At the end of the last phase in each turn, the first player
marker is passed to the player on the left and a new turn
begins.
The phases of each turn are:
PHASE I: Upkeep
PHASE II: Movement
PHASE III: Arkham Encounters
PHASE IV: OtherWorld Encounters
PHASE V: Mythos
During each phase, every player, starting with the
first player and continuing clockwise, performs the
actions that take place during that phase.

THE GAME TURN:
During the Upkeep Phase, each player takes the following
actions, in order.
1. Refresh Exhausted Cards
Some cards exhaust themselves when used, which
means that they are turned face down for the remainder
of the turn. At the start of the Upkeep Phase, each player
refreshes those cards by turning them face up. Simply
remember that you can use face-up cards and that you
cannot use face-down cards until you turn them face up
again during the next Upkeep Phase.
Example: Richard (playing Harvey Walters) cast his
Wither spell last turn, forcing him to exhaust the card by
turning it face down. During the Upkeep Phase, Richard
turns the Wither spell face up once more. The spell is
now ready for him to cast again.
2. Perform Upkeep Actions
After refreshing his exhausted cards, each player must
review his investigator's cards to see if any of them
have an Upkeep action. Each player must perform all
Upkeep actions listed on his investigator's cards every
turn. Upkeep actions may be taken in any order the player
wishes. Bless, Curse, Bank Loan, and Retainer cards
do not require an upkeep roll during the first Upkeep
Phase after an investigator acquires them.
Example: Looking over his cards, Richard finds that he
has a Retainer card, which requires an Upkeep action.
First, Richard receives $2 for the Retainer. He takes two
money tokens from the pile of money tokens in the play
area. Richard must then roll a die to see if he keeps or
loses the Retainer. Richard is fortunate and keeps the
Retainer card for another turn.
3. Adjust Skills
Finally, each player may adjust his investigator's skills
using the three skill sliders he placed on his investigator
sheet during game setup. This process, as well as a general
description of how skill sliders work, is explained in
the "Adjusting Skills" diagram.
Exception: During game setup, players may set their
three skill sliders on any of the four stops on their three
skill tracks. This initial setup does not adhere to the normal
rules that restrict the number of stops a slider may
be moved each turn.
During the Movement Phase, each player takes one of
the following two movement actions, depending on
whether his investigator is in Arkham or an Other World
(see "Game Board Breakdown," page 21):

The two types of investigator movement are described
below.
Arkham Movement
If the player's investigator is located in Arkham (i.e., his
investigator marker is in the town area of the game
board), he receives movement points equal to his Speed
value, as found on his investigator sheet. A player may
spend one movement point to move his investigator
marker from one board area to another, so long as the
two areas are connected by a yellow line on the game
board. One movement point allows an investigator to
move from a location to a street area, from one street
area to another, or from a street area to a location.
Locations are indicated by circular illustrations on the
Arkham portion of the game board. Street areas are represented
by rectangular boxes on the game board, one
for each neighborhood in Arkham (for example,
Miskatonic U. and Rivertown).
Evading Monsters
Locations and street areas that contain monster markers
may affect an investigator's movement. Each time an
investigator attempts to leave a location or street area
occupied by one or more monster markers, the investigator
must either fight or evade each of the monsters there
(see "Evading Monsters" and "Combat" on pages 14 for
more information). Likewise, if an investigator ends his
Phase II: Movement
Phase I: Upkeep

ADJUSTING SKILLS:
During Upkeep, you may adjust your character's
skills in order to react to the investigator's
situation. Focus represents your character's
ability to split his attention between the
different tasks at hand. It determines the total
number of "stops" you may adjust your skills
each turn.
Example 1: Above, Amanda has a focus of 3.
This allows her to move her skill sliders a
total of 3 stops each turn. This turn, she
chooses to move her Speed/Sneak slider to the
right by 2 stops. Then, having 1 point of focus
remaining, she moves her Lore/Luck slider 1
stop to the left.
Example 2: This turn, Amanda decides to use
all of her focus to move her Fight/Will slider
3 stops to the right. She has no focus left to
move any of her other skill sliders, so they
remain where they were last turn.
Be careful how you adjust your skills, particularly
if your character's focus is low. If you
make your skills too one-sided, you can be
caught off-guard at a crucial moment without
the ability to react.

RETURNING TO ARKHAM:
Example: Amanda Sharpe is returning to
Arkham from The Dreamlands. She can
choose to move to either location that contains
an open gate to The Dreamlands. After
she does so, an explored marker is placed
under her investigator marker.
Amanda Sharpe starts her turn in the Graveyard, in Rivertown. Her Speed is currently
4, which gives her 4 movement points for the turn. She decides that she
wants to move to Administration, so her move breaks down like this:
1) 1 movement point to move from the Graveyard to the street area of Rivertown.
2) 1 movement point to move from the street area of Rivertown to the street area of
French Hill.
3) 1 movement point to move from the street area of French Hill to the street area of
Miskatonic U.
4) 1 movement point to move from the street area of Miskatonic U. to Administration.
ARKHAM MOVEMENT OTHER WORLD MOVEMENT
Example: Amanda Sharpe is in the first area
of The Dreamlands. During her movement, she
moves to the second area of The Dreamlands.
During her movement next turn, she returns to
Arkham, moving to any location with an open
gate to The Dreamlands and placing an
explored marker underneath her investigator
marker.
movement in a location or street area occupied by one or
more monsters, he must fight or evade each such monster.
If the investigator fails to evade a monster, the monster
immediately deals its combat damage to him (see
"Combat" on page 14) and he immediately enters combat
with it.
Once an investigator begins combat with a monster for
any reason, his movement is over. Regardless of whether
or not he wins the battle, the investigator loses the rest
of his movement points and must remain where he is.
Picking Up Clues
Any time an investigator ends his movement in a location
that contains Clue tokens, he may immediately take
any or all of those Clue tokens. The investigator may not
take any Clue tokens if he merely moves through the
location and then continues his movement: He must end
his movement in the location containing the Clue tokens.
OtherWorld Movement
Other Worlds are represented by the large circular
spaces along the edge of the game board. These spaces
represent bizarre locales, strange dimensions, and alternate
worlds that figure prominently in the mythos.
Players typically enter these worlds by exploring gates
(see "Gate," page 9).
Note that each circular space representing an Other
World is bisected by a prominent line: The areas to the
left and right of this line are the two areas of the Other
World.
If an investigator is in an Other World at the beginning of
the Movement Phase, he receives no movement points.
Instead, his movement depends on whether he is in the
first (left) or second (right) area of the Other World.
If the investigator is in the first area of the Other
World, he moves to the second area.
If the investigator is in the second area of the Other
World, he returns to Arkham. The player must choose a
location that contains a gate to the Other World he is leaving.
After choosing such a location, he places his investigator
marker there. Then he places an "explored" marker
underneath his investigator to show that he has explored
the gate. This marker remains in play as long as the investigator
remains at the location. If there is no open gate
leading to the Other World the investigator is in, the
investigator is lost in time and space (see page 17).
Delayed Investigators
During the game, certain effects can cause an investigator
to become delayed. When this occurs, place the
investigator marker on its side, indicating the delay.
Delayed investigators receive no movement points and
do not move during the Movement Phase. Instead, during
the investigator's Movement Phase, the player stands
the investigator marker back up to show that the investigator
is no longer delayed. On the following turn, the
investigator will be able to move once again as normal.
During the Arkham Encounters Phase, each player
whose investigator is in a location (not a street area or
Other World area) must take one of the following
actions. The action the investigator must take depends
on whether his location contains an open gate or not.
1. No Gate
If the location has no gate, the investigator has an
encounter at the location. The player shuffles the location
deck corresponding to the neighborhood his investigator
is in and draws a card from the deck. The player
then finds the entry for his investigator's location, reads
the entry aloud, and performs any actions indicated by
the card text. Note that the card may indicate that "a
monster appears," in which case the investigator must
either evade the monster (see "Evading Monsters," page
14) or fight it (see "Combat," page 14). Once the player
has resolved any actions indicated by the card, he
returns the card to the location deck.
Monsters and gates cannot appear in sealed locations,
even if this is directed by the text of a card.
PHASE III: Arkham
Encounters
8
Example: Amanda Sharpe is at the City of
the Great Race, which has a yellow and a
green encounter symbol. She begins drawing
cards from the gate deck. The first card
is red, so it cannot be encountered at the
City of the Great Race. The player discards
it and draws again. She draws a
blue card this time and again discards it.
Finally, she draws a green card and examines
it to see if it has a specific City of the
Great Race encounter. It does not, so she
looks at the Other encounter and follows
its instructions.
LOCATION ENCOUNTER OTHER WORLD ENCOUNTER
(NO GATE)
Example: Amanda Sharpe is at the
Historical Society in Southside, so she
draws a card at random from the
Southside location deck and looks at
the entry for the Historical Society.
According to the card, a janitor offers
her a ride to the Woods. If she accepts,
she moves to the Woods and has another
encounter there.
LOCATION ENCOUNTER
(WITH GATE)
Example: Amanda Sharpe is at Black
Cave, but there is a gate leading to the
Dreamlands there. Since she doesn't
have an explored marker under her, she
is drawn through the gate to the first
area of the Dreamlands.
Monsters that appear as the result of a location or gate
encounter never remain on the board after the encounter
is resolved. If an investigator evades such a monster,
return it to the monster cup (see "Monsters in
Encounters," page 22).
2. Gate
If the location has a gate, the investigator is drawn
through the gate. He moves to the first area (the left
area) of the Other World indicated on the gate marker.
Exception: Once an investigator has entered a gate and
returned to Arkham, the player places an explored marker
underneath his investigator marker. While he remains
in the gate's location, he is no longer drawn through the
gate, but may instead try to close or seal the gate (see
"Closing and Sealing Gates," pages 16-17). If the investigator
leaves the location before the gate is closed or
sealed, discard the explored marker. If the investigator
returns to the location later in the game, he will again be
drawn through the gate. He must resolve the Other
World Encounters Phase again before he can return to
the location and attempt to close or seal the gate.
Important: If an investigator is drawn through a gate
that appears as a result of an encounter (such as "A gate
appears!" or "A gate and a monster appear!"), then he is
delayed, just as if he had been drawn through a gate in
the Mythos Phase.
During the Other World Encounters Phase, investigators
in Other World spaces have encounters there. The Other
World spaces on the board are marked with circular
icons of different colors. These colored circles are called
encounter symbols. When an investigator has an Other
World encounter, the player draws cards from the gate
deck, one at a time, until he draws a card whose color
matches one of these encounter symbols. Gate cards that
do not match a color of the encounter symbols are
placed face down on the bottom of the gate deck.
Once the player has drawn a gate card that matches an
encounter symbol's color, he examines it to see if there is
a specific encounter for the Other World his investigator
is currently in. If a specific encounter is listed, the player
reads that entry aloud and performs any actions indicated
by the card text. If there is no specific encounter listed,
the player reads the "Other" entry aloud and performs
any actions indicated by the card text.
The card text of an Other World encounter may result in a
monster appearing, in which case the investigator must
either evade the monster (see "Evading Monsters," page 14)
or fight it (see "Combat," page 14). Once the encounter is
resolved, the player then discards the card face down to the
bottom of the gate deck.
Monsters that appear as the result of location or gate
encounters never remain on the board after the
encounter is resolved. If an investigator evades such a
monster, return it to the monster cup (see "Monsters in
Encounters," page 22).
During the Mythos Phase, the first player draws a
mythos card and performs the following actions:
1. Open Gate and Spawn Monster
2. Place Clue Token
3. Move Monsters
4. Activate Mythos Ability
Each of these actions is performed as follows.
1. Open Gate and Spawn Monster
The first player begins by looking at the lower-left corner
of the mythos card he has drawn to see where the dimensional
forces are assaulting Arkham this turn. One of three
things happens, depending on whether there is an open
gate, an elder sign marker, or neither at that location.
A. Location Has Elder Sign
If an elder sign token has been placed at the location,
nothing happens. No gate opens and no monster appears.
The elder sign has permanently sealed the gate at this
location, and no new gates can open here.
B. Location Has Open Gate
If there is already an open gate at the location, a monster
emerges from every open gate currently on the board.
This is called a monster surge. When a monster surge
occurs, the number of monsters drawn and placed is equal
to the number of open gates or the number of players,
whichever is greater. The first player draws monster
markers from the cup at random and places them on
each location with an open gate. When placing monsters,
they should be divided as evenly as possible among the
open gates, with no gate having more monsters placed on
it than the gate where the monster surge occurred this
turn. If there are more monsters to be placed than
allowed by the monster limit (see "Monster Limits and
the Outskirts," page 18), the players should decide
where monsters will be placed. The players must make
this decision before monsters have been drawn from the
cup. If the players cannot agree where the monsters are
to be placed, the first player decides the placement.
Example: There are 3 open gates (at the Black Cave,
Science Building, and Unvisited Isle), 7 players, and no
monsters in play when a mythos card is drawn that
opens a gate at the Black Cave. This causes a monster
surge: 7 monsters are drawn from the cup and placed on
the open gates. They must be distributed as evenly as
possible, so each of the 3 gates gets 2 monsters placed
on it, and the 7th monster is placed on the Black Cave,
where the monster surge occurred. The Black Cave now
has 3 monsters, while the other 2 open gates each have
2 monsters on them.
C. No Elder Sign or Gate
If there is neither an open gate nor an elder sign marker
at the location, a new gate opens and a monster emerges
from it. This means that the following things happen, in
order:
1. The Doom Track Advances
The first player places a doom token with the eye symbol
face up in the first available space on the Ancient
One's doom track. If the marker is placed in the last
available space on the doom track, the Ancient One has
awakened and the end of the game has begun (see "The
Ancient One Awakens!," page 20). If the Ancient One
awakens, you do not need to complete the rest of the
Mythos Phase: Proceed immediately to the final battle.
Note that it is also possible for the Ancient One to awaken
because there are too many gates open in Arkham at
once (see "The Ancient One Awakens!," page 20).
2. A Gate Opens
The first player draws a gate marker from the stack of
gate markers near the board and places it face up on the
location. Discard any Clue tokens that were on the location:
The investigators have missed their opportunity to
follow up on those leads.
3. AMonster Appears
The first player draws a monster marker from the cup at
random and places it on the location. If this would bring
the number of monsters over the monster limit, the first
Phase V: Mythos
Phase IV: OtherWorld
Encounters
1. Open Gate and
Spawn Monster
2. Place Clue
Token
3. Move Monsters
4. Activate Card's
Special Ability.
A. Each mythos card has a trait just below its title that tells you
what its subtype is. Mythos cards are either Headlines,
Environments, or Rumors. Each subtype behaves slightly differently,
and all are explained in detail in these rules.
RESOLVING A MYTHOS CARD
player places the monster in the Outskirts instead (see
"Monster Limits and the Outskirts," page 18).
Exception: If there are five or more investigators playing,
then draw and place two monsters instead of one.
Important: Unlike investigators, monsters are never
drawn through gates.
Example: Wade is the first player and draws the mythos
card shown in an earlier example. The lower-left corner
of the card shows Black Cave, which has neither an
open gate nor an elder sign marker. First, Wade adds a
doom token to the Ancient One's doom track. There are
still open spaces on the track, so Wade draws the top
gate marker from the stack and places it on top of Black
Cave. The revealed gate is one that leads to Yuggoth.
Finally, Wade draws a monster from the cup (a Dark
Young) and places it on Black Cave as well.
Gates Opening On Investigators
If a gate opens at a location that contains an investigator,
he is immediately drawn through the gate to the first
area of the corresponding Other World. As a result of the
sudden disorientation caused by the gate swallowing
him, the investigator is delayed. Place his investigator
marker on its side. The investigator will not move during
the next Movement Phase (see "Delayed
Investigators," page 16).
2. Place Clue Token
Most mythos cards indicate a location where a Clue
token appears. Place a Clue token on the indicated location
unless there is an open gate there. If one or more
investigators are at that location, one of them (they
should decide among themselves) may immediately take
that Clue token. If the players cannot agree on who gets
the Clue token, the first player decides.
3. Move Monsters
Although monsters start out in locations as they emerge
from gates, they soon leave those locations to roam the
streets of Arkham. In order to determine monster movement,
the first player looks at the lower-right corner of
the mythos card he has drawn for the turn. This area
describes which monsters move during the turn as well
as the direction they move on the board.
Each mythos card has two movement areas on it, represented
by black and white boxes. Each location and
street area on the board likewise features a black or
white arrow (sometimes both, see below).
Each movement box on a mythos card also has one or
more dimension symbols printed in it. Each monster
marker likewise features such a dimension symbol on its
movement side.
10
MONSTER MOVEMENT:
Example 1: The mythos card at
the left is drawn. Monsters showing
the symbols in the white area
(slash, triangle, and star) move,
following the white arrows.
Monsters showing the symbols in
the black area (hexagon) also
move, following the black arrows.
Specifically, in this example:
1. The Gug, with its slash symbol,
follows the black and white arrow
leading out of its current location.
B. The Dark Young does not move.
Although it has a hexagon symbol,
its border is yellow, indicating that
it is a stationary monster that
never moves.
Example 2: The mythos card above is drawn. Monsters showing the symbols in the white area
(square and diamond) move, following the white arrows. Monsters showing the symbols in the
black area (circle) also move, following the black arrows. Specifically, in this example:
1. The Dimensional Shambler, with its square symbol, follows the white arrow leading out of its
current location. Then, because it has a red border, signifying that it is fast, it moves one more
time (2), again following the white arrow.
A. The Dhole does not move. Although it has a circle symbol, it is sharing a location with
Amanda Sharpe, so it remains there instead of moving away from her.
Monsters currently on the board whose dimension symbols
are listed in either movement box on the mythos card
move to a connected location or street area, as follows:
If the monster is listed in the white movement box, it
follows the white arrow leading out of its current area.
If the monster is listed in the black movement box, it
follows the black arrow leading out of its current area.
Important: The arrows leading out of some locations
are black on one side and white on the other. These
arrows count as both a black arrow and a white arrow,
so monsters listed in either the black or the white movement
box of the mythos card follow that arrow.
Monster Movement and Investigators
A monster that already shares a location or street area
with one or more investigators does not move and
remains in place. Certain monsters move several times
(see the description of "Fast" monsters below); when
such a monster enters an area that contains one or more
investigators, it must immediately stop moving. No
encounter with the monster takes place during this
phase, but the investigators will be forced to evade or
fight the monster during the Movement Phase.
Example: A Star Spawn moves into Uptown, where Joe
Diamond and Ashcan Pete are currently located. During
their next Movement Phase, one or possibly both of
these investigators will need to deal with the Star
Spawn.
Monster Movement Specialties
Most monsters move as described above, but some monsters
have special movement abilities that follow special
rules. There are five different types of monster movement
in Arkham Horror. These are indicated by the
colored borders on the movement side of the monster
markers:
Normal (Black Border): Normal monsters move as
described above.
Stationary (Yellow Border): Stationary monsters never
move. They always remain at the location where they
entered play.
Fast (Red Border): Fast monsters move twice, following
the appropriate arrows for both steps of their movement.
Fast monsters stop moving immediately if they
encounter an investigator.
Unique (Green Border): Monsters with unique movement
(such as the Hound of Tindalos) have special
movement abilities listed on the combat side of their
monster markers. Turn such a monster marker over and
follow the instructions there.
Flying (Blue Border): Flying monsters generally move
directly towards the nearest investigator in a street area,
or move to the "Sky" holding area if they can't reach any
investigators this turn. Flying monsters are explained in
more detail in the "Flying Monsters"diagram.

FLYING MONSTERS:
Flying monsters are
indicated by a blue
border. When a flying
monster moves during
the Mythos Phase, it
obeys the following
rules:
A) If the flying monster is in a location or
street area with one or more investigators, it
stays where it is.
B) If the flying monster is in a location or
street area with no investigators and there
are one or more investigators in a connected
street area, it moves into that street area.
If there is more than one connected street
area containing investigators, it moves
towards the investigator in those street
areas with the lowest current Sneak skill
(including any relevant equipment and
skills; if there is a tie, the first player
chooses which investigator the monster
moves towards).
C) If the flying monster is in a street area
with no investigators and there are no
investigators in a connected street area, it
moves to the Sky (see The Sky, below).
THE SKY
The Sky is a holding area considered to be a
street area that is connected to every street
area in Arkham. Flying monsters in the Sky
can swoop down on investigators anywhere
in the streets of Arkham. Note that monsters
in the Sky count against the monster
limit (see "Monster Limits and the
Outskirts," page 18).
4. Activate Mythos Ability
Finally, the first player looks at the special text on the
mythos card, examining the trait listed at the top of the
card. The various traits indicate different types of
mythos cards, and they are resolved in different ways as
described below.
Headline: The first player immediately resolves the
special text of a Headline mythos card. He then discards
the mythos card face down to the bottom of the
mythos deck.
Environment: The special text of an Environment
mythos card remains in play for several turns, possibly
even until the end of the game. The first player places
the card face up next to the game board, discarding any
previous Environment mythos card face down to the
bottom of the mythos deck. This means that only one
Environment mythos card can be in play at a time.
Rumor: The special text of a Rumor mythos card
remains in effect until either the Pass or Fail condition
on the card is met, at which point the card is resolved
and is discarded face down to the bottom of the mythos
deck.
Only one Rumor can be in play at once. If there is
already a Rumor mythos card in play, ignore the special
text of the newly drawn Rumor and discard it face down
to the bottom of the mythos deck after resolving its
other effects for the turn (such as gate opening and monster
movement).
Other Effects: Additionally, the mythos card may call
for one or more "activity" or "closed" markers to be
placed on specific locations. Simply place the respective
markers on the locations indicated by the card. If the
card leaves play, remove the markers from the locations
as well.
Once the first player has resolved all steps of the
Mythos Phase, the first player marker is passed to the
left. The turn is now over and a new one begins with the
Upkeep Phase. Play continues in this way until the end
of the game.
The game ends in one of two ways: The investigators
either overcome the mythos threat, or they are defeated
by it.
VICTORY
The investigators win the game in any of the following
three ways:
A. Close the Gates
To satisfy this victory condition, the players must
accomplish two objectives:
An investigator must close the last gate on the board,
such that there are currently no open gates.
When the last gate is closed, the players must have a
number of gate trophies equal to or greater than the
number of players. These gate trophies do include the
one just awarded for closing the last gate, but do not
include any trophies the players have spent.
If these two conditions are met, the players immediately
win. Stability is restored to Arkham as the Ancient One
slips back into a deep slumber for a few more millennia.
B. Seal the Gates
If, at any time, there are six or more elder sign tokens on
the board, the players immediately win. The Ancient
One is driven away and peace returns to Arkham.
C. Banish the Ancient One
If the Ancient One awakens (see page 20) but the investigators
manage to defeat it, the players immediately win.
The Ancient One is banished beyond time and space.
SCORING VICTORIES
If the players achieve one of the preceding victory conditions,
the investigators have defeated the mythos threat
and saved Arkham. The player with the most gate trophies
is awarded the honorary title of First Citizen of
Arkham. In the case of a tie, the title goes to the player
with the most monster trophies.
You can rate your victory by using the following scoring
system. Start with the highest printed number on the
doom track of the Ancient One. Subtract the terror level
at the end of the game from this number. Now apply the
following modifiers:
1 per unpaid/defaulted Bank Loan
1 per elder sign played during the game
+1 per unspent gate trophy at the end of the game
+1 for every three unspent monster trophies held at the
end of the game.
+1 per sane, surviving investigator at the end of the
game
Example: The courageous investigators close the final
gate, returning Azathoth to his fitful slumber just as the
terror level climbs to 6. Subtracting the terror level (6)
from the highest printed number on Azathoth's doom
track (14) gives a base score of 8. The group had two
defaulted Bank Loans (2), played three elder signs during
the game (3), had eight unspent gate trophies (+8),
had 17 unspent monster trophies (+5), and had 5 sane,
surviving investigators at the end of the game (+5) for a
total of 21 points.
DEFEAT
If the Ancient One awakens and defeats all of the investigators
in battle, the space-time continuum ruptures, the
Ancient One is unleashed, and all of mankind suffers for
the investigators' failure. In this unfortunate event, all
players lose the game.
After reading the rules up to this point, you should be
familiar with the overall flow of the game, including
what you must accomplish to win. The remaining sections
of this rulebook offer everything you'll need to
know to meet those objectives: how to make skill checks
for your investigator, how to evade and fight monsters,
how to cast spells, how to close or seal gates, and more.
These are the basic abilities investigators use to accomplish
things in the game. Every investigator has six
skills, listed below. Investigators also have a value for
each of these skills, depending on how they have positioned
their skill sliders (see page 6). A skill value represents
the number of dice the investigator rolls for a
check based on that skill.
Fight: Used for physical feats of strength and
endurance. Also used in combat.
Lore: Used for tests of mystic knowledge and ability.
Also used in casting spells.
Luck: Used to determine the whims of chance. It is the
most common skill used in encounters.
Sneak: Used for feats of stealth and thievery. Also used
when evading monsters.
Speed: Used for tests of quickness and agility. Also used
to determine an investigator's movement.
Will: Used to test an investigator's force of personality
and willpower. Also used for Horror checks at the start
of combat.
SKILL CHECKS:
Investigators are often called upon to perform skill
checks in order to avoid harm or to accomplish something
in the game. When the game calls for a skill check,
it is presented in a consistent format that provides the
following information:
The skill you must use to perform the check
The modifier (bonus or penalty) to the check, if any
The difficulty of the check (not listed if the
difficulty is 1)
Example 1: Make a Sneak (1) check. In this example,
Sneak is the skill the investigator must use for the check.
The modifier is 1, a penalty in this case. Since it is not
specifically listed, the difficulty is 1.
Example 2: Make a Luck (+2) [2] check. In this example,
Luck is the skill the investigator must use for the
check. The modifier is +2, a bonus. The difficulty is 2.
When making a skill check, a player always rolls a number
of dice equal to his investigator's value in the appropriate
skill.
Modifiers and difficulties are discussed in more detail
below.
MODIFIERS:
This number is added to or subtracted from the investigator's
skill value before the player makes the check. The result is
the number of dice the player rolls to make the check. Note
that modifiers always apply to the number of dice a player
rolls for a check, not to the results of the individual dice.
Example: Michael McGlen is asked to make the two
skill checks listed in the example above. His current
Sneak is 3 and his current Luck is 2. In the first example,
he subtracts one from his Sneak of 3 (for the 1
modifier) and therefore rolls two dice. In the second, he
adds two to his Luck of 2 (for the +2 modifier) and
therefore rolls four dice.
Important: If the modifier reduces an investigator to 0
or fewer dice, he automatically fails the check. The
player may still spend Clue tokens to make the check
(see "Spending Clue Tokens on Skill Checks," below).
DIFFICULTY:
This is the number of successes an investigator must roll
during a skill check to pass the check. Each die result of
5 or 6 counts as one success. Remember that if a skill
check does not list a difficulty, it is assumed to be 1.
Example 1: Michael McGlen rolls two dice for the Sneak
check described above. He gets a 2 and a 5. The 5 is a success,
giving him a total of one success. Since the Sneak
check had no listed difficulty, it is assumed to be 1. Michael
has enough successes to pass the check.
Example 2: Michael next rolls four dice for the Luck check
described above. He gets 2, 5, 3, and 6, for a total of 2 successes
(the 5 and 6 were both successes). Since the check's
difficulty was 2, Michael passes the Luck check.
There are four types of special skill checks that players
should be aware of: Evade checks, Horror checks,
Combat checks, and Spell checks. Each of these special
skill checks are based on one of the six skills listed
above and are described later in this rulebook. If an
investigator receives a bonus to a skill, any special
checks based on that skill also receive this bonus.
However, if an investigator receives a bonus only to a
special check, that bonus does not apply to any other
checks based on the same skill.
For example, Evade checks are a special type of Sneak
check. A Skill card that gives +1 Sneak is useful both
for Sneak and Evade checks. However, an item that
gives +2 to Evade checks is only useful when making
Evade checks. That bonus cannot be used on a normal
Sneak check.
SPENDING CLUE TOKENS ON
SKILL CHECKS:
Clue tokens represent information about the mythos
threat that an investigator may acquire. A player may
spend Clue tokens, one at a time, after any skill check
(failed or not). Each spent Clue token allows the player
to roll one additional die; if the result is a success, it is
added to the total from the original roll.
Example: Joe Diamond fails a Lore (1) [3] check, but
gets two successes. Deciding that he really needs to pass
this check, he discards one Clue token and rolls another
die, getting a 3. Still no success, so Joe spends a second
Clue token and rolls a second die, this time getting a 6.
This extra success increases his total number of successes
for the check to 3, enough to pass the check.
Important: Spending a Clue token always gives you the
bonus dice that you are entitled to, even if the modifier
has dropped the number of dice you can roll below 0.
When an investigator attempts to move out of an area
containing a monster, or ends his movement in such an
area, he must either fight the monster or evade it.
An investigator may attempt to evade a monster by making
an Evade check. An Evade check is a skill check
using the investigator's Sneak value. The check is modified
by the monster's Awareness value, which is printed in
the upper-right corner of the monster marker's movement
side. The difficulty of the Evade check is always 1 unless
the monster has a special ability that states otherwise.
If the investigator passes the Evade check, he evades the
monster and the player may continue his turn as normal,
whether continuing movement or interacting with the
area. If the investigator fails the check, the monster
immediately deals its combat damage to him and combat
with the monster begins (see "Combat," later in these
rules).
Example: Ashcan Pete moves from the Merchant
District into Northside, where a Star Spawn is waiting
for him. Pete wants to continue moving to the Curiositie
Shoppe, so he must evade the Star Spawn. Pete's current
Sneak is 4 and the Star Spawn's Awareness is 1, so he
rolls three dice, hoping for at least one success. If he
passes the check, he has evaded the Star Spawn and may
continue moving. If he fails, the Star Spawn damages
him for 3 Stamina and he enters combat with it.
An investigator may remain in the same area as a monster
after evading it. He simply remains where he is and does
not have to enter combat with the monster this phase.
This allows an investigator to enter a gate in the same
location as evaded monsters. Such an investigator could
(if able) evade the monsters during the Movement Phase,
and enter the gate during the Arkham Encounters Phase.
Example: In the example above, if Pete successfully
evades the Star Spawn, he could choose to remain in the
Northside area without fighting it for now. However,
once the next Movement Phase takes place, he'll have to
deal with the Star Spawn once more (by either evading it
again or fighting it).
If there is more than one monster in an area, the investigator
must evade each monster in turn, in any order he
chooses. If he fails to evade a monster, the monster deals
its combat damage to him and combat with the monster
begins. If he defeats the monster, he must still fight or
evade any monsters in the area that he has not yet either
fought or evaded. Regardless of whether or not any further
evade attempts succeed, the investigator's movement
is finished as soon as he fails even one evade
check.
Example: If the Star Spawn in the example above was
also accompanied by a Shoggoth, Pete would need to
evade both of them to keep moving to the Curiositie
Shoppe. If Pete decides to evade the Star Spawn first
and fails the check, he can no longer move. Assuming he
wins the ensuing combat with the Star Spawn, he must
still either fight or evade the Shoggoth.
Sometimes monsters appear as the result of a location or
gate encounter. An investigator can evade these monsters
just like any others. However, these monsters never
remain on the board after the encounter is resolved. If an
investigator evades such a monster, immediately return
the marker to the monster cup.
Eventually, all investigators have to face their fears and
do battle with the mythos. Whenever an investigator
enters combat with a monster, resolve the following
steps, in order.
1. Horror Check
First, the alien nature of the mythos threatens to overwhelm
the investigator's mind. This is represented by a
Horror check.
A Horror check is a skill check using the investigator's
Will value. This value is modified by the monster's horror
rating (found in the lower-left corner of its combat side).
The difficulty of this check is always 1 unless the monster
has a special ability that states otherwise.
If the investigator passes the check, nothing happens. If
he fails the check, the investigator loses the amount of
Sanity shown underneath the monster's horror rating. The
player discards the appropriate number of Sanity tokens
from his investigator sheet. An investigator reduced to
zero Sanity tokens is driven insane (see page 16).
Example: Ashcan Pete failed to evade the Star Spawn,
so now he must make a Horror check. Pete's Will is currently
3, but the Star Spawn's horror rating is 3, so
Pete doesn't get to roll any dice for the check and automatically
fails. Pete loses 2 Sanity, as shown underneath
the Star Spawn's horror rating. Pete removes two Sanity
tokens from his sheet. If he had somehow managed to
succeed, nothing would have happened to him.
Whether he passes the check or not, an investigator only
needs to make one Horror check each time he does battle
with a monster. If the investigator successfully
evades the monster in the first place, he never needs to
make a Horror check at all.

EVADING MONSTERS
Example 1: Here, Amanda moves from the
Woods to the Uptown Streets, where the Dhole
is waiting for her. Amanda wishes to continue
moving to the Southside Streets, so she'll have
to make an Evade check. Her Sneak is currently
2, and the Dhole's Awareness is 1, so
Amanda will roll 1 die, hoping for a success.
Example 1A: Should Amanda fail her Evade
check, the Dhole immediately deals its combat
damage to her, and she loses 4 Stamina. If she's
still conscious, she then has to make a Horror
check, and if she survives that, she'll have to
decide whether to fight the Dhole or try to flee
from it again. Even if Amanda defeats the Dhole
somehow, her movement is over at this point.
Example 1B: Should Amanda pass her Evade
check, she successfully slips past the Dhole, and
her movement can continue as normal. In the
illustration above, she continues on her way to
the Southside Streets.
2. Fight or Flee
Next, the investigator must choose: He may either
attempt to flee or fight the monster.
A. Flee
The investigator tries to evade the monster, using an
Evade check just as described under "Evading
Monsters" earlier in these rules. If he passes the check,
he eludes the monster and the battle immediately ends.
If he fails the check, the monster deals its combat damage
to the investigator and the battle continues (see
"Monster Damage," below).
B. Fight
If the investigator fights the monster, he makes a
Combat check. A Combat check is a skill check using
the investigator's Fight value. This value is modified by
the monster's combat rating (printed in the lower-right
corner of its combat side). The difficulty of this check is
equal to the monster's toughness, which is represented
by the number of "blood drop" icons that appear in the
lower center of the monster's combat side.
If the investigator passes the Combat check, he defeats
the monster. The investigator's player removes the
marker from the board and places it in front of him as a
monster trophy. If the investigator fails the check, the
monster deals its combat damage to him (see "Monster
Damage," below).
Example: After failing his Horror check, Ashcan Pete
decides to fight the Star Spawn rather than attempt to
flee. Pete's Fight is 6 and the Star Spawn's combat rating
is 3, so Pete rolls three dice. The Star Spawn's
toughness is 3 (the difficulty for the check), so Pete must
succeed on all three dice to defeat the monster. If Pete
succeeds, he takes the Star Spawn marker and places it
in front of him as a monster trophy. If he fails, the Star
Spawn deals its combat damage to Pete.
Important: If a monster's toughness is greater than 1,
partial success has no effect on it. A monster must be
completely defeated in one Combat check or it ignores
all successes the investigator rolled.
3. Monster Damage
Each time an investigator fails to evade or defeat a monster,
the monster deals its combat damage to the investigator.
The amount of combat damage a monster deals is
printed below its combat rating. The investigator loses
Stamina equal to this number. The player discards the
appropriate number of Stamina tokens from his investigator
sheet. An investigator reduced to zero Stamina
tokens is knocked unconscious (see page 16).
Note that some monsters have abilities that add some
special effect to their combat damage. For example, the
Nightgaunt drops the investigator through the nearest
open gate instead of causing the investigator to lose
Stamina tokens.
If the investigator remains conscious, sane, and in the
same space as the monster after this step is resolved, the
combat continues. Return to step 2, Fight or Flee, and
continue the combat until it is resolved.
Example: Pete fails the Combat check, so the Star
Spawn deals its combat damage to him. The Star
Spawn's combat damage is 3, so Pete loses three
Stamina. Battered, bruised, and more than a little crazy,
Pete prepares for another round of combat.

COMBAT:
Example: Here, Amanda has decided to
fight an Elder Thing. The first thing she'll
have to do is make a Horror check. Her
Will is 2, but looking at the Elder Thing's
horror rating (A), she sees that its modifier
is 3, bringing her total down to 1,
which automatically fails. As a result, she
loses 2 Sanity, as shown beneath the
Elder Thing's horror rating.
Assuming that Amanda isn't driven
insane by the Sanity loss, she can now
make a Combat check to try to defeat the
Elder Thing. Her Fight is 3, and looking
at the Elder Thing's combat rating (B),
she sees that it has a modifier of +0, giving
her a total of 3 dice for her check. The
monster has a toughness of 2, so she'll
need 2 successes to defeat it. Crossing
her fingers, she rolls the dice and gets
this result:
The 5 and the 6 are both successes, giving
her the 2 successes she needed to defeat
the Elder Thing! She claims it as a monster
trophy.
If Amanda had failed, the Elder Thing
would have dealt its combat damage to her,
causing her to lose 1 Stamina and 1
Weapon or Spell of her choice. She would
then have to decide whether to fight it again
or try to flee from it. However, she would
not need to make another Horror check,
since she's already made one this combat.
USING WEAPONS AND SPELLS IN
COMBAT
Investigators can gain a valuable edge in combat by
using weapons and spells. The biggest advantage of
weapons is that they automatically grant bonuses on
Combat checks?no additional skill checks are required
to use them. However, most weapons grant Physical
Combat bonuses, which have no effect at all against
many mythos monsters.
Spells, on the other hand, grant Magical Combat
bonuses. These are effective against almost every monster
in Arkham Horror. An investigator must successfully
cast a spell to gain its benefits (see "Casting
Spells" below). If an investigator fails to cast a spell, it
provides no bonuses for the combat at all. In other
words, spells are more powerful and versatile than
weapons, but they are not always a sure thing.
Weapon and Spell Limits
There is a limitation on the number of weapons and
spells an investigator may use at once. This limitation is
represented by "hand" icons printed in the lower-left
corner of each weapon and spell card. Each investigator
may use any combination of weapons and spells and add
their skill bonuses together, as long as their combined
number of hand icons does not exceed two. Note that a
spell requires the number of hands printed on the card,
even if the investigator fails to cast it.
A spell or weapon that gives you a bonus (even one that
says it lasts until the end of combat) only continues to
give you the bonus while you devote the required number
of hands to it. You can choose to switch
weapons/spells in later combat rounds, but as soon as
you "release" a spell or weapon, it stops working for
you. Similarly, spells that are refreshed (such as at the
beginning of each combat round in the final battle) cease
to work and must be re-cast.
Example: Ashcan Pete has acquired some equipment
and a spell before he faces a Star Spawn. He decides to
use his .45 Automatic (a weapon that gives him a +4
Physical Combat bonus and uses one hand) and
Shrivelling (a spell that gives him a +6 Magical Combat
bonus if successfully cast and uses one hand). Pete successfully
casts Shrivelling. With the .45 Automatic and
the successful spell casting, he gains a total bonus of
+10 (+4 from the weapon, +6 from the spell). Adding
his Fight value of 6, Pete's total skill for the Combat
check is 16. He then accounts for the Star Spawn's combat
rating (3), leaving him with 13 dice with which to
roll 3 successes (as the Star Spawn's toughness is 3).
An investigator must successfully cast a spell in order to
gain its benefits. Every spell has a casting modifier, and
most have a Sanity cost. To cast a spell, an investigator
must pay its Sanity cost and then pass a Spell check.
To pay the Sanity cost of a spell, the player simply
removes a number of Sanity tokens from his total equal
to the cost of the spell. Players must always pay the
Sanity cost of a spell, whether or not the investigator
subsequently passes the Spell check.
A Spell check is a skill check that uses the investigator's
Lore value, adjusted by the spell's casting modifier. If
the Spell check fails, the spell has no effect. If the check
succeeds, the spell takes effect.
Example: Harvey Walters attempts to cast Heal, a spell
with a casting modifier of +1 and a Sanity cost of 1.
First, Harvey pays the Sanity cost , then he makes a
Lore (+1) check. His Lore is 4 at the moment, so he rolls
5 dice and gets 2 successes. The Heal spell is successful.
The spell's effect allows Harvey to recover Stamina
equal to the number of successes he rolled on the Spell
check, so Harvey recovers two Stamina.
This section of the rules describes the various conditions
that may affect an investigator during the course
of the game.
SANITY AND STAMINA:
An investigator begins the game with a number of
Sanity and Stamina tokens equal to the values listed on
the investigator's sheet. These two values are the investigator's
maximum Sanity and maximum Stamina.
While an investigator may gain and lose Sanity or
Stamina over the course of the game, the investigator's
current Sanity or Stamina may never exceed the investigator's
maximum Sanity or Stamina.
Insane in Arkham
If an investigator is ever reduced to 0 Sanity while in
Arkham, the investigator is driven temporarily insane.
He must immediately choose and discard half of his
items and half of his Clue tokens (rounded down), along
with all retainers (if any). The player then immediately
moves his investigator to Arkham Asylum. The investigator
is restored to 1 Sanity, returning 1 Sanity token to
his investigator sheet, and has no further encounters this
turn. The investigator may take his next turn as normal.
Unconscious in Arkham
If an investigator is ever reduced to 0 Stamina while in
Arkham, the investigator is knocked unconscious. He
must immediately choose and discard half of his items
and half of his Clue tokens (rounded down), along with
all retainers (if any). The player then immediately moves
his investigator to St. Mary's Hospital. The investigator is
restored to 1 Stamina and has no further encounters this
turn. The investigator may take his next turn as normal.
Insane or Unconscious in an Other
World
If an investigator is reduced to 0 Stamina or 0 Sanity
while in an Other World, the investigator is lost in time
and space. He must immediately choose and discard half
of his items and half of his Clue tokens (rounded down),
along with all retainers (if any). His Stamina and Sanity
are restored to a minimum of 1. The player immediately
moves his investigator to the Lost in Time and Space area
of the board and places the investigator marker on its side
to indicate that the investigator is delayed (see "Lost in
Time and Space," later in these rules).
Important: When adding up items before discarding
them, count all Common Items, Unique Items, and
Spells. In addition, the Deputy's Revolver and the Patrol
Wagon both count as items. Allies, Skills, and other
cards do not count towards this total.
DELAYED INVESTIGATORS
An investigator whose marker is placed on its side has
been delayed. Delayed investigators do not move during
the Movement Phase, and they receive no movement
points. Instead, when the player of the delayed investigator
takes his turn in the Movement Phase, he should
stand the investigator marker back up to show that the
investigator is no longer delayed.
ARRESTED INVESTIGATORS
Some encounters may result in an investigator being
arrested and taken to the Police Station. When this
occurs, the player should place the investigator in the
Jail Cell (rather than the main Police Station area).
Arrested investigators lose half of their money (round
down) and are delayed. The player completely skips the
next turn, simply standing his investigator marker and
placing it in the main area of the Police Station during
the Movement Phase. The player may act in the following
turn as normal.
Investigator Status
Casting Spells
LOST IN TIME AND SPACE
Any investigator who is lost in time and space is immediately
moved to the Lost in Time and Space area of the
board. The investigator is now delayed, and the player
should place the investigator marker on its side. The
investigator loses his next turn, remaining in the Lost in
Time and Space area. The player may only stand his
investigator marker back up during the Movement
Phase. On the following turn, at the start of the Upkeep
Phase, the player may move his investigator to any location
or street area of his choice in Arkham.
DEVOURED INVESTIGATORS
In rare cases, investigators may be devoured. The player
immediately discards all of his cards (except unspent
trophies) and shuffles his investigator sheet in with the
unused investigator sheets. The player then draws a new
investigator at random and sets up the investigator as if
he were starting a new game (as described in "Game
Setup" earlier in these rules).
If an investigator is reduced to both 0 Sanity and 0
Stamina at the same time, that investigator is devoured.
If an investigator's maximum sanity or maximum
stamina is reduced to 0, that investigator is devoured.
BLESSED AND CURSED
INVESTIGATORS
Blessings and curses represent aid or interference from
greater powers, and investigators may gain these cards
through encounters or rumors.
While an investigator is Blessed, every die result of 4
or better counts as a success.
 While an investigator is Cursed, only die results of 6
count as successes.
An investigator may never be Blessed and Cursed at the
same time. If a Blessed investigator is Cursed, simply
discard the Blessing. If a Cursed investigator is Blessed,
simply discard the Curse. Likewise, a player may never
have more than one Bless or Curse card at a time.
As dimensional gates open in locations all over Arkham,
the investigators must work to close or seal them.
CLOSING GATES
Before he can close a gate, an investigator must enter
the gate, explore the Other World it leads to, and then
return to Arkham.
When an investigator returns from an Other World, as
described earlier, the player should place an explored
marker under his investigator marker. This gives the
investigator an opportunity to destroy and close the gate
during the next Arkham Encounters Phase. If the investigator
leaves the gate's location for any reason, the player
must discard the explored marker  the investigator has
missed his opportunity and must explore the gate again
if he wishes to close it.
If, during the Arkham Encounters Phase, an investigator
is on a location that contains an open gate and that
investigator has acquired the explored marker, he may
now attempt to close the gate. To do so, the investigator
must choose whether to make a Lore check or a Fight
check, using the number printed on the gate marker as
the modifier. If the investigator succeeds at this check,
he closes the gate and takes the gate marker as a gate
trophy. If the investigator fails, the gate remains open.
The investigator can try to close it during the Arkham
Encounters Phase next turn (and in subsequent turns, as
long as he does not leave the gate location).
Closing and Sealing Gates
SEALING GATES
A: USING CLUE TOKENS
B: USING AN ELDER SIGN
To seal a gate using Clue
tokens, a player must:
1. Succeed at his roll to close
the gate.
2. Spend 5 Clue tokens.
3. Claim the gate marker as a
gate trophy.
4. Take 1 elder sign token
from the pile of unused tokens
and place it on the location
where the gate was sealed.
To seal a gate using an elder
sign, a player must:
1. Return the elder sign card
to the box (no roll to close the
gate is needed).
2. Claim the gate marker as a
gate trophy.
3. Take 1 doom token from the
Ancient One's terror track,
turn it over to its elder sign
side and place it on the location
where the gate was sealed.
This effectively decreases the
current doom track rating by 1.
SEALING GATES
If an investigator successfully closes a gate, he may
immediately spend five Clue tokens to permanently seal
it. The player takes a doom token from the pile of
unused doom tokens, turns it over to its elder sign side,
and places the token on the gate location. The player
still claims the gate marker as a trophy. The gate is now
sealed: No further gates can open and no monsters can
appear at the location of the sealed gate for the remainder
of the game.
MONSTERS AND CLOSING GATES
When a gate is closed, all monsters in Arkham, the Sky,
and the Outskirts that have the same dimension symbol
(see "Monster Movement," page 10) as the closed or
sealed gate are removed from the board and returned to
the cup. A monster's dimension symbol is printed in the
lower-right corner of the marker's movement side.
ELDER SIGNS
Elder signs are a specific type of Unique Item that
investigators can use to seal gates. There are several
elder sign cards in the Unique Item deck. To use an
elder sign, the investigator must be at the location of the
gate and must have acquired an explored marker, just as
if he were attempting to close the gate. The investigator
does not need to make a Lore or Fight check or spend
any Clue tokens to use the elder sign.
To use an elder sign, do the following:
The player removes 1 Sanity and 1 Stamina from his
investigator sheet. This may knock the investigator
unconscious or drive him insane, but the elder sign still
takes effect.
The player takes a doom token from the Ancient One's
doom track (not the pile of unused doom tokens), turns it
to its elder sign side, and places it on the location to be
sealed. This effectively lowers the current doom level of
the game by 1, and this is one of the only ways to do so.
The player then returns the elder sign card to the box.
This specific card cannot be drawn or used again this
game.
Once these actions have been taken, the gate is now
sealed: No further gates can open and no monsters can
appear at the location of the sealed gate for the remainder
of the game.
MONSTERS GUARDING GATES
During the turn he returns to Arkham from an Other
World, an investigator does not have to evade or fight
any monsters in the gate's location. This rule only
applies during the turn he returns to Arkham; in subsequent
turns, if the investigator remains in the location,
he must evade or fight any monsters there as normal.
There is a limit on the number of monsters that may be
in Arkham at one time. The limit is equal to the number
of players in the game, plus three.
This monster limit only applies to those monsters actually
moving around on the Arkham city portion of the
board or located in the "Sky" area. Monsters that appear
at a location and are then removed from the board do
not count, nor do monsters located in the Outskirts.
Important: If the terror level reaches 10, Arkham is
overrun and the monster limit is removed for the rest of
the game. See "The Terror Track," below.
If adding a monster to the board would bring the number
of monsters in Arkham above the monster limit, the
monster is placed in the Outskirts area instead.
Monsters in the Outskirts remain there until the
Outskirts become too full.
Number of Players Maximum Monsters in
Outskirts
When the number of monsters in the Outskirts exceeds
this limit, return all of the monsters in the Outskirts to
the monster cup and increase the terror level by 1. The
Monster Limits and terror level is described below.
the Outskirts
ANCIENT ONE SHEET BREAKDOWN
1: Name: The Ancient One's name.
2: Combat Rating: This is the Ancient One's combat
rating. It is only used if it awakens and the players
have to fight it.
3: Defenses: This section lists any defensive abilities
the Ancient One has. See Monster Special Abilities
on page 24 for descriptions of these abilities.
4: Worshippers: This section grants certain abilities
to one or more types of monsters. These abilities are
active all game long.
5: Power: This is a unique effect that the Ancient
One has on gameplay. Most effects are active all
game long.
6: Attack: This is the Ancient One's attack, only
used during combat with it. Some Ancient Ones also
have a Start of Battle ability that occurs only once,
when investigators begin to battle it.
7: Doom Track: This tracks how close the Ancient
One is to waking up.
BATTLING ANCIENT ONES
At the start of the battle, be sure that the Ancient
One's doom track is completely filled with
doom tokens. Immediately activate any Start of
Battle abilities the Ancient One may have.
Each round, players first get an Upkeep
Phase, then take turns making attacks on the
Ancient One, keeping a running tally of the
total number of successes they've scored as a
group. Each time they accumulate a number of
successes equal to the number of players or
higher (for example, 4+ successes in a 4 player
game), they remove 1 doom token from the
Ancient One's doom track and reset the success
tally to 0.
After each player has made an attack, the Ancient
One attacks. Often, the players will need to make
skill checks or suffer some misfortune, as
described on the Ancient One sheet.
ENDING THE BATTLE
Should the players remove the last doom token
from the Ancient One's doom track, the
Ancient One is defeated and they win!
However, if all of the investigators are
devoured, they have failed to stop the Ancient
One's arrival, and they lose the game.
The terror track shows the current terror level in Arkham
 the current mental state of the city's inhabitants. Various
things can raise the terror level, such as too many monsters
entering the Outskirts or the effects of some mythos
cards. The terror level can never go down, so players
should be very cautious about allowing it to increase.
When the terror level rises, move the terror track marker
up the terror track as indicated. The terror track marker
cannot leave the track, so the terror level cannot go
above 10.
Once the terror level has reached 10, if it ever increases
again (via a mythos card special ability, for example),
instead of moving the terror track marker, add one doom
token to the Ancient One's doom track for each point the
terror level should have increased.
"Margie, pack your bags!"
The most obvious effect of the terror level is that people
pack up and leave town. For every point the terror
level goes up, select one Ally card at random from
the Ally deck and return it to the box. That Ally is no
longer available for the rest of the game. Once all Allies
have been returned to the box or claimed by investigators,
this specific result has no effect for the remainder
of the game.
"That's it. I'm Moving the Shop to
Boston."
If the terror level reaches a sufficiently high level, the
Curiositie Shoppe, the General Store, and Ye Olde
Magick Shoppe close for the rest of the game.
If the terror level reaches 3, place a closed marker on the
General Store. It is closed for the rest of the game and
no one may enter that location. Immediately move any
investigators and monsters currently at the General Store
to the Rivertown street area.
If the terror level reaches 6, place a closed marker on the
Curiositie Shoppe. It is closed for the rest of the game
and no one may enter that location. Immediately move
any investigator or monster currently at The Curiositie
Shoppe to the Northside street area.
If the terror level reaches 9, place a closed marker on Ye
Olde Magick Shoppe. It is closed for the rest of the
game and no one may enter that location. Immediately
move any investigator or monster currently at Ye Olde
Magick Shoppe to the Uptown street area.
"Look at All the Monsters."
If the terror level reaches 10, the town of Arkham is
overrun by monsters and the monster limit is completely
removed from the game. There is no longer any limit on
the number of monsters that can rampage through town.
No matter how valiantly the investigators struggle, they
are facing incredible odds. Despite their best efforts, the
Ancient One may awaken and enter Arkham. If this
comes to pass, the only thing the investigators can do is
try to drive it back using the weapons and magic they've
accumulated throughout the game.
There are five conditions under which the Ancient One
may awaken.
1. Doom Track is Full
If enough gates open, eventually the Ancient One's
doom track will fill up with doom tokens, even if the
investigators use all of the elder signs. When a doom
token is placed on the last open space on the doom
track, the Ancient One awakens immediately.
2. Too Many Gates Open
If the investigators allow too many gates to be open at
the same time, this can awaken the Ancient One. The
number of open gates that will immediately awaken the
Ancient One depends on the number of players.
3. No Gate Markers
Finally, the Ancient One awakens immediately when a
new gate opens and there are no unused gate markers
left in the pile. Thus, if gate markers run low, players
should spend one or more gate trophies to replenish the
supply.
4. No Monsters in the Cup
The Ancient One also awakens if a monster should be
drawn from the monster cup, but there are no monsters
in the cup.
5. Terror Level 10 and Too Many
Monsters
The Ancient One also awakens if the terror level has
reached 10 and there are monsters in play equal to twice
the normal monster limit (for example, 16` monsters in a
five-player game).
Very Important: If the Ancient One awakens and its
doom track is not full, fill its doom track with doom
tokens before proceeding to the final battle.
The Ancient One
Awakens!
The Terror Track
MOVEMENT SIDE
COMBAT SIDE
1: Name: The monster's name.
2: Awareness: This is the modifier used to Evade
this monster.
3: Movement Border: The color of the border indicates
the monster's movement type (Black  normal,
Red  fast, Yellow  stationary, Blue  flying,
Green  special).
4: Home Dimension: This is the monster's home
dimension. When a gate is sealed or closed, all
monsters in play that share its home dimension are
returned to the cup.
1: Abilities: Any special traits or abilities that the
monster has. See Monster Abilities on page 24
for a complete explanation of bolded traits.
2: Flavor Text: This text has no game effect. It
is there only to provide atmosphere.
3: Horror Rating: This is the modifier used in
Horror checks against this monster.
4. Horror Damage: This shows how many
Sanity tokens an investigator loses if he fails a
Horror check against this monster.
5: Toughness: This is the difficulty of any
Combat checks made against this monster.
6. Combat Damage: This shows how many
Stamina tokens an investigator loses if he fails a
Combat check against this monster.
7: Combat Rating: This is the modifier used in
Combat checks against this monster.

GAME BOARD BREAKDOWN:
The game board is divided into several sections: Arkham
(A), the OtherWorlds (C), the Terror Track (D), and the
City Limits (EG).
The Arkham city section of the board shows the city of
Arkham divided into 9 neighborhoods, each of which
has between 2 and 3 important locations in it, as well as
a street area (B). The investigators move around on this
section of the board, passing through the streets to visit
the various locations. Each location is marked with a
number of icons showing the most common types of
encounters at that location.
The OtherWorlds (C) section of the board shows several
alternate dimensions that the investigators can enter by
moving through the gates that open up on the Arkham section
of the board. Investigators enter gates in order to
explore them and find some weakness that will enable
them to close the gate once they've returned to Arkham.
The Terror Track (D) section of the board tracks the current
terror level of the townsfolk of Arkham. If the investigators
allow the terror level of Arkham to get too high,
people will begin to leave town, making it difficult to
recruit Allies. Eventually the three shops in town (The
General Store, The Curiositie Shoppe, and Ye Olde Magick
Shoppe) will close down, making it more difficult for the
players to win the game.
The City Limits section of the board contains three special
areas: Outskirts (E), The Sky (F) and Lost in Time and
Space (G). Investigators that suffer a horrible fate of some
sort move to Lost in Time and Space for a short time.
Monsters on the board in excess of the limit wander out of
town to the Outskirts where they terrorize the inhabitants.
Finally, flying monsters move to The Sky before swooping
down on the next investigator they spot moving through
the streets of Arkham.
INVESTIGATOR SHEET BREAKDOWN MONSTER MARKER BREAKDOWN
1: Name and Occupation: Your character's name
and job.
2: Maximum Sanity: This is how much Sanity
your character starts the game with. You cannot
raise your Sanity higher than this number (although
you can increase this number).
3: Maximum Stamina: This is how much Stamina
your character starts with. You cannot raise your
Stamina higher than this number (although you can
increase this number).
4: Home: This is the location on the game board at
which your investigator starts the game.
5: Possessions: This is the equipment your character
starts the game with.
6: Unique Ability: This is a special ability only
your character can use.
7: Focus: This is your character's ability to adjust
his skills each turn. See Adjusting Skills on page 6
for more info.
8: Skill Pairs: These are your character's skills.
They are paired so that if you increase one skill in a
pair, the other decreases.
THE FINAL BATTLE
When the Ancient One awakens, any investigators that
are lost in time and space are immediately devoured
and eliminated from the game. The surviving investigators
must face the Ancient One in the final battle!
Before the final battle begins, discard any active
Environment or Rumor cards. Additionally, once the
final battle begins, investigators should no longer collect
money or roll for Retainers or Bank Loans.
Combat with the Ancient One is divided into rounds.
During a round, players first have an opportunity to
adjust their investigators. Then, each player attacks the
Ancient One. Finally, the Ancient One attacks the investigators.
Once these steps have been resolved, a new
round begins. The structure of each round in a battle
with an Ancient One is as follows:
1. Investigators Refresh
At the beginning of a round of combat with an Ancient
One, the investigators may refresh their cards, use any
character abilities, and adjust their skill sliders as though
it were the Upkeep Phase. Next, the first player marker
should be passed to the left. Finally, they may trade
items among themselves as if they were in the same
location (see "Trading Equipment" later in these rules).
2. Investigators Attack
Next, starting with the first player and continuing clockwise
around the table, every player whose investigator is
still participating in the battle may make a Combat
check against the Ancient One using its combat rating as
the modifier.
Unlike a normal battle, the Ancient One cannot be
defeated in a single attack. Instead, keep track of every
success an investigator scores against the Ancient One
(see "Skill Checks," page 13). These successes are
cumulative, and each successive player adds to them
with his own attack. When the players accumulate a
total number of successes equal to the number of players
(including any players that were eliminated from the
game), remove one doom token from the Ancient One's
doom track and reset their cumulative successes to zero.
If the last doom token is removed from the Ancient One,
the investigators have defeated it! See "Ending the
Game" on page 12.
3. Ancient One Attacks
After all of the players (except eliminated players) have
made one Combat check against the Ancient One, the
Ancient One unleashes its attack on each of the investigators.
This attack varies by Ancient One, but they are
all extremely deadly. For example, Hastur forces all the
investigators to make an increasingly difficult Will
check or lose Sanity.
Any investigator reduced to 0 Sanity or Stamina by the
Ancient One's attack is devoured. If an investigator is
devoured during the final battle with the Ancient One,
that player is eliminated from the game (i.e., the player
does not draw a new character). If all investigators are
devoured, the Ancient One is unleashed on the world
and the players lose the game.
After the Ancient One's attack is resolved for each
investigator, a new round begins. This continues until
either the investigators defeat the Ancient One or all
have been devoured.
The following are some additional rules topics that
should help to clarify play of Arkham Horror.
DISCARDING CARDS
When you discard a card, return it face down to the bottom
of the appropriate deck. Players only shuffle most
decks when they draw a card that instructs them to do
so. Location decks, however, are shuffled before a player
draws from them. A player who draws multiple cards
from a Location deck draws them all, one after the other,
without shuffling between draws.
LOCATION SPECIAL ABILITIES
Some locations on the board have special abilities.
When an investigator enters such a location, the player
may resolve the special ability of the location instead of
having an encounter there. If there is an open gate at the
location, investigators cannot use the location's special
ability.
Example: The Science Building has the Dissection ability.
This ability allows an investigator to spend monster
trophies or gate trophies in exchange for Clue tokens.
An investigator at the Science Building may use this
ability instead of having an encounter there, and investigators
cannot use the ability if there is an open gate in
the location.
MONSTERS IN ENCOUNTERS
Many location and Other World encounters indicate that
a monster appears. To resolve such an encounter, the
player must draw a monster from the monster cup and
resolve the encounter as normal (i.e., the investigator
may attempt to evade the monster or fight it). No matter
how the encounter is resolved, the monster is never left
on the board. The monster is returned to the monster
cup, regardless of whether the investigator evades or
defeats the monster, or is knocked unconscious or driven
insane by it.
Many encounters state that "A gate and a monster
appear!" For these encounters, both the monster and the
gate stay on the board. However, many other encounters
state that just a monster appears. For example, one of
the Black Cave encounters states "A monster appears!"
and one of the Hibb's Roadhouse encounters states "A
horrible monster appears!" When a monster but not a
gate appears in an encounter, the monster does not stay
on the board. If such a monster is defeated, players may
take it as a trophy (unless its special ability says otherwise).
If the monster is not defeated, it is returned to the
monster cup, regardless of whether the investigator
evades the monster or is knocked unconscious or driven
insane by it.
Miscellany
SPECIAL CARD LIMITATIONS
In most cases, a player may never have more than one
copy of each special card at the same time. This rule
applies to Retainers, Bank Loans, Silver Twilight
Memberships, and Bless/Curse cards.
SPENDING MONEY
Often, investigators will be told that they can purchase
items "for list price" or "for $1 over list price." An
item's list price is always found in the card's lower-right
corner. Items are purchased by simply discarding money
tokens equal to the price listed.
SPENDING TROPHIES
There are several locations on the game board where
players can spend the monster and gate trophies they
have collected. For example, a player can spend monster
or gate trophies at the River Docks to gain $5. All monster
trophies spent in this manner are returned to the
monster cup, while all gate trophies are placed face
down on the bottom of the pile of gate markers.
TIMING CONFLICTS
If two or more game effects happen simultaneously, the
players choose the order in which they occur. If the
players cannot agree, the first player decides.
TRADING EQUIPMENT
An investigator in the same street area, Other World
area, or location as another investigator may trade
money, Common Items, Unique Items, and Spells. This
may be done before, during, or after movement, but not
during combat.

CREDITS:
Concept: Richard Launius
Second Edition Game Design: Richard Launius and
Kevin Wilson
Additional Development: Kevin Wilson, Shannon
Appelcline, Greg Benage, and Christian T. Petersen
Rules: Shannon Appelcline, Kevin Wilson, Christian T.
Petersen, and Greg Benage
Editing: Greg Benage and Christian T. Petersen
Additional Ideas and Support: Christopher Allen
Additional Design and Development, First Edition:
Charlie Krank, Sandy Petersen, Lynn Willis
Graphic Design: Scott Nicely, Brian Schomburg
Playtesting and Comments for this edition: FFG Staff,
Christopher Allen, Shannon Appelcline, Michael Arick,
Michael Blum, Jacob Butcher, Charles Engan, Claire
Engan, Steve Hill, David K., Evan Kinnie, Pete Lane,
Richard Launius, Thyme Ludwig, Tess O'Riva, Eric
Rowe, DT Strain, Julie Strain, Nate Tepe, Thor Wright,
Mike Zebrowski, and Team XYZZY
Executive Developer: Greg Benage
Publisher: Christian T. Petersen
Special Thanks to: Howard Philips Lovecraft
For online community, FAQ, customer service, and additional
information on Arkham Horror, please visit:
WWW.FANTASYFLIGHTGAMES.COM
Call of Cthulhu and Arkham Horror used under license
from Chaosium, Inc. Arkham Horror: A Call of Cthulhu
Boardgame is copyright 2006 and trademark Fantasy
Flight Publishing, Inc. All Rights Reserved. No portion
of this game may be copied or reproduced without written
consent from its publishers or copyright holders.

INDEX:
allies: leaving town, 20
Ambush: 24
Ancient One: awakening, 20; final battle with, 22; sheet
breakdown, 19
Arkham Encounters Phase: 8-9
Arkham movement: 6-8
arrested: 16
Awareness: 21
Blessed: 17
closing gates: and winning the game, 12; how to 17-18
Clue tokens: picking up, 8; placing , 10; spending, 13-14
combat: 14-16; example of, 15
combat rating (of monsters): 15, 21
Cursed: 17
damage (from monsters): 15, 21
delayed: 8, 16
devoured: 17; during Final Battle, 22
doom track: 9, 19, 20, 22
elder signs: 18
encounters: in Other Worlds, 8, 9; monsters appearing
because of: 22; resolving 8-9
ending the game: 12
Endless: 24
Environment: 12
evading monsters: 6, 8 14; example of, 14
exhaust: 6
explored markers: 4, 8
final battle: 22
flying monsters: 11
focus: 6, 21
game board breakdown: 21
gates: and winning the game, 12; closing, 12, 17; monsters
guarding: 18; opening during Mythos Phase, 9;
opening on investigators, 10; sealing, 12, 17, awakening
the Ancient One, 20, 24
home dimension: 21
insane: 16
investigator sheet breakdown: 19
locations: closing, 20; encounters at, 8-9; special abilities
of, 22
lost in time and space: 17
Magical Combat: 16
Magical Immunity: 24
"Mask" monsters: 5
monster limits: 18, 24
monster marker breakdown: 21
monster movement: 10-11; example of, 10
monster trophies: collecting, 15; spending, 23
Movement Phase: 6, 8
Mythos card (resolving): 9
Mythos Phase: 9-12
neighborhoods: 21
Nightmarish: 24
Other World Encounters Phase: 9
Other World movement: 8
Outskirts: 18, 24
Overwhelming: 24
Physical Combat: 16
Physical Immunity: 24
refresh: 6
Rumor: 12
sealing gates: and winning the game, 12; how to, 18
setup:
skills: 12-13; adjusting, 6; skill checks, 13
skill checks: 13
special card limitations: 23
spells, casting: 16
street area: 21
terror track: 20, 21; summary of levels: 24
timing conflicts: 23
toughness (of monsters): 15, 21
trading equipment: 23
unconscious: 16
Upkeep Phase: 6
victories, scoring: 12
weapon and spell limits: 16
weapons: 16
Index
The Terror Track
23
24
LOCATION ICONS
Above each location on the game board is either a green or red
diamond. This diamond indicates the relative danger of the location.
Locations with green diamonds are stable. Monsters and gates
will never appear in these locations, although it is possible for
monsters to move to them in certain circumstances.
Locations with red diamonds are unstable. Monsters and gates
can appear in these locations, sometimes even as a result of
encounters. These locations should be approached with caution.
Each location on the map also has several icons associated with
it. These icons tell the players the most likely outcomes they can
expect when they go to that location. The following is a key to
the icons you will find at different locations on the board:
Allies
Blessing
Clue Tokens
Common Items
Money
Additionally, each unstable location gives players the possibility
of encountering an Ally, and Clue tokens will often appear
in these locations as a result of resolving mythos cards.
Some locations have special location icons that have their colors
reversed, such as the Sanity icon on Arkham Asylum.
These icons indicate that there is a guaranteed method of
acquiring the described item at that location.
MONSTER SPECIAL ABILITIES
Common monster special abilities are described in detail below.
Ambush: Once combat has begun with this creature, the investigator
no longer has the option to flee it, but must instead fight until one
or the other is defeated.
Endless: A monster with this ability cannot be collected as a monster
trophy. Instead, each time it is defeated, return it to the cup.
Physical/Magical Resistance: AWeapon or Spell that adds a bonus of
the resisted type can only provide half its normal bonus (rounded up).
Example: Using a Tommy Gun (normally a +6 Physical bonus)
against a monster with Physical Resistance only gives a +3 bonus.
Physical/Magical Immunity: AWeapon or Spell that adds a bonus
of the resisted type provides none of its normal bonus.
Example: Using a Tommy Gun (normally a +6 Physical bonus)
against a monster with Physical Immunity gives a +0 bonus.
Nightmarish X: Any investigator that passes a Horror check when
facing this monster still loses X Sanity. This ability doesn't apply if
the investigator fails the Horror check.
Example: A Dark Young (Nightmarish 1) causes an investigator to
lose 3 Sanity if the investigator fails his Horror check or 1 Sanity if the
investigator passes. The Sanity loss from Nightmarish 1 doesn't apply
if the investigator has already failed the Horror check.
Overwhelming X: Any investigator that defeats this monster in
combat still loses X Stamina. This ability doesn't apply when the
investigator fails his Combat check against the monster.

PHASE SUMMARY:
The phases of the turn are as follows:
Phase I: Upkeep
Phase II: Movement
Phase III: Arkham Encounters
Phase IV: OtherWorld Encounters
Phase V: Mythos
During Upkeep, players perform any upkeep actions that are
required of them from turn to turn. This can include collecting
their pay, making payments on loans, refreshing their equipment,
and adjusting their skill sliders.
During Movement, investigators in Arkham move according to
their current Speed value. Investigators in Other Worlds
advance to the next area of the Other World, returning to
Arkham if they were already in the second area of the Other
World.
During Arkham Encounters, any investigator in a location
without a gate draws one location card from the location deck
for that neighborhood and follows the instructions on it.
Usually, Arkham encounters involve a skill check.
During OtherWorld Encounters, any investigator in an Other
World draws cards from the gate deck until he gets a gate card
matching the encounter symbol of the Other World he's in, then
follows the instructions on it. Like Arkham encounters, Other
World encounters often involve skill checks.
During Mythos, the first player draws 1 mythos card and
resolves it. First, one or more new monsters appear in Arkham,
sometimes along with a new gate, and a Clue token will usually
be placed as well. Next, some of the monsters on the board may
move through the city. Finally, the special effects of the mythos
card take place, which can cause the rules of the game to
change, either momentarily or for multiple turns.
SKILL CHECKS
Investigators are often called upon to perform skill checks in
order to avoid harm or gain advantages. These skill checks list
the skill to be used, which determines the number of dice the
player rolls for the check; the modifier to the check, which may
provide a bonus or penalty to the number of dice the player rolls;
and the difficulty, which determines the number of successes the
player must roll to pass the check (die results of 5 and 6 count
as successes).
SPECIAL SKILL CHECKS
There are four special types of skill checks that players should be
aware of: Evade checks, Horror checks, Combat checks, and
Spell checks. Each of these special skill checks use the value of
one of the six basic skills. Bonuses to the skill that a special
check uses apply to the special check as well. However, bonuses
to special checks cannot be used when making normal checks.
Evade checks are based on Sneak (see "Evading Monsters", pg. 13).
Combat checks are based on Fight (see "Fight", pg. 14).
Horror checks are based on Will (see "Horror Check", pg. 14).
Spell checks are based on Lore (see "Casting Spells", pg. 15).
TOO MANY GATES
If too many gates are open at once, the Ancient One can immediately
awaken.
Number of Players The Ancient One Awakens at:
12 8 Open Gates
34 7 Open Gates
56 6 Open Gates
78 5 Open Gates
Very Important: If the Ancient One awakens this way, fill
the doom track with doom tokens before proceeding to the
final battle!
MONSTER LIMIT
The number of monsters allowed on the board at one time is limited
by the number of players. Any monsters that would be
placed on the board beyond this limit are instead placed in the
Outskirts.
Monster Limit = (Number of Players) + 3
Important: If the terror level reaches 10, Arkham is overrun,
which means that the monster limit is removed for the rest of the
game.
MONSTERS IN THE OUTSKIRTS
If adding a monster to the board would bring the total number of
monsters in Arkham above the monster limit, then the monster
is placed in the Outskirts instead. Monsters in the Outskirts remain
there until the Outskirts becomes too full, as shown below:

When the number of monsters in the Outskirts of Arkham
exceeds this limit, place all of those monsters back in the cup
and raise the terror level by 1.
TERROR LEVEL SUMMARY
To summarize the effects of the terror level:
For every step the terror level increases, return one Ally at random
from the Ally deck to the box.
Additionally, the following events happen when a certain terror
level is reached:



GAME NAME:
Battlestar Galactica

The Cylons were created to make life easier on the Twelve
Colonies. And then the day came when the Cylons decided
to kill their masters. After a long and bloody struggle, an
armistice was declared and the Cylons left for another world
to call their own.
Forty years later, they returned, and brought humanity to the
brink of extinction. The remaining humans, led by the crew of
the Battlestar Galactica, fled in hope of finding a new home,
one known by legend as Earth.
Humanity's only hope lies in finding Earth's location while
fighting off the unrelenting Cylons. But as resources run low,
it is discovered that the enemy can now appear human and
has infiltrated the fleet from the inside.

OVERVIEW:
Battlestar Galactica: The Board Game provides a unique
gaming experience. Unlike most games where players win
individually, Battlestar Galactica is a team game, with the
added complication that which players are on which teams is
kept secret.
Each player is secretly assigned a team at the start of the
game. The two teams are the humans and the Cylons, and
each team has a specific objective. The human players are
trying to find the map to Earth, while the Cylon players simply
want to annihilate the human race. Players win or lose with
the other members of their team...but must figure out who
they can trust in order to lead their team to victory.

COMPONENTS:
- This Rulebook
- Game Board
- 10 Character Sheets
- 52 Cardboard Tokens consisting of
- 4 Resource Dials
- 10 Character Tokens
- 4 Piloting Tokens
- 2 Nuke Tokens
- 12 Civilian Ship Tokens
- 2 Basestars
- 4 Centurion Markers
- 4 Basestar Damage Tokens
- 8 Galactica Damage Tokens
- 1 Fleet Marker
- 1 Current Player Token
- 110 Large Cards consisting of
- 70 Crisis Cards
- 16 Loyalty Cards
- 17 Quorum Cards
- 5 Super Crisis Cards
- 1 President Title Card
- 1 Admiral Title Card
- 128 Small Cards consisting of
- 21 Leadership Skill Cards
- 21 Tactics Skill Cards
- 21 Politics Skill Cards
- 21 Piloting Skill Cards
- 21 Engineering Skill Cards
- 22 Destination Cards
- 1 Kobol Objective Card
- 1 Eight-sided Die
- 32 Plastic Ships consisting of
- 8 Vipers
- 4 Raptors
- 16 Cylon Raiders
- 4 Cylon Heavy Raiders
- 4 Plastic Connectors (for resource dials)
- 10 Plastic Character Stands

COMPONENT:
Game Board
The game board is where
the main action of the
game takes place. It
depicts the locations on
Galactica and Colonial
One, as well as the areas
of space surrounding
them. For a full diagram
of the game board,
see "Game Board
Breakdown" on page 8.
Battlestar Galactica
Resource Dials and
Plastic Connectors
The resource dials are used to
track the dwindling resources of
the humans. They are attached
to the game board using the
plastic connectors (see the
"Installing Resource Dials"
diagram on page 5).
Character Sheets
Each character has a
sheet that describes that
character's skill set and
special abilities.
Character Tokens
and Stands
Each character is represented by a token
that is slotted into a plastic stand.
Piloting Tokens
Each character who has the ability
to pilot has a corresponding piloting
token. A character's piloting token is
placed under a viper when that character
is piloting it.
Current Player Token
This token is used to help the players
remember which player is currently
taking his turn.
Nuke Tokens
The Admiral starts the game with two
nuke tokens. These powerful weapons can
destroy basestars, but are finite and should
not be wasted.
Civilian Ship Tokens
These tokens represent the
civilian ships that the humans
must protect during Cylon
attacks. These tokens have a
common back, and the face
lists the resources (usually
population) that are lost if that
ship is destroyed.
Basestars
These large tokens
represent the Cylon
basestars, which can
attack Galactica and
launch raiders during
combat.
Centurion Markers
These markers are used to track progress on
the Boarding Party track. Should any of these
tokens reach the end of the track, the humans
lose the game (see "Activate Heavy Raiders and
Centurions" on page 24).
Damage Tokens
These tokens represent the
vital systems that can be
damaged when Galactica or
a basestar is hit by an enemy
attack.
Fleet Marker
This marker is used to track progress on
the Jump Preparation track. When this
token reaches the end of the track, the
fleet jumps to its next destination (see
"Jumping the Fleet" on page 13).
Battlestar Galactica
Destination Cards
These cards are used when the
fleet jumps, to determine which
destination the fleet reaches.
Kobol
Objective Card
This card lists when the sleeper
agent phase takes place and how
the human players win the game.
Skill Cards
These cards are drawn by players at the
start of their turn. These cards are
used to overcome crises, or may
be played to provide special abilities.
Each character has access to
different skills and will therefore be
able to help overcome different types
of crises.
President and Admiral
Title Cards
These cards grant the owner
a special action, as well as
the ability to make important
decisions posed by certain Crisis
Cards. One player starts the
game with each of these cards,
but they often change hands
throughout the game.
Quorum Cards
These cards can be drawn by
the President, and can increase
morale, help deal with Cylon players,
or provide special abilities
for other players.
Crisis Cards
These cards represent the
different roadblocks and
disasters the human players
must overcome. Some of these
cards require skill checks, while
others represent Cylon attacks.
These cards are the main way
resources are lost.
Super Crisis Cards
These five cards represent
extremely dangerous crises.
When a Cylon player reveals
himself, he receives one of these
cards (see "Revealed Cylon
Players" on page 19).
Loyalty Cards
Each player is dealt one Loyalty
Card at the start of the game,
and another one halfway through
the game. These cards are kept
secret and inform each player
whether or not he is a Cylon (see
"Revealed Cylon Players" on page 19).
Eight-sided Die
This die is used primarily to resolve combat, but
may also be used by certain Crisis Cards.
Plastic Ships
These plastic ships are
used during Cylon attacks.
Their limited quantities
make them a precious
commodity.

Battlestar Galactica

GAME SETUP:
Follow these steps to prepare to play Battlestar Galactica:
The Board Game.
1. Place Game Board: Place the game board at the center of
the table. Set the food and fuel dials to "8," the morale dial
to "10," and the population dial to "12."
2. Set Up Tokens and Ships: Place the eight vipers and four
raptors in the "Viper and Raptor Reserves" space of the
game board. Then place the fleet token on the start space
of the Jump Preparation track. Last, place all other tokens
(facedown) and plastic ships adjacent to the game board.
3. Determine First Player: Randomly choose a player to be
the first player, and give him the current player token. This
player will choose his character first and take the first
turn of the game.
4. Choose and Place Characters: Starting with the first
player and proceeding clockwise, each player chooses a
character of the character type(s) that is most plentiful
(political leader, military leader, or pilot). This restriction
does not apply to support characters, who may be
chosen at any time. After choosing a character, the player
receives the corresponding character sheet and stand-up
character token, as well as a piloting token if applicable. He
then places his character token on the location specified
on his character sheet.
Example: The first player chooses Laura Roslin (a political
leader) as his character. The next player may choose any
military leader or pilot (since they are the most plentiful).
He could also choose a support character.
5. Distribute Title Cards: The President title is given to the
first available player in the following list: Laura Roslin, Tom
Zarek, and Gaius Baltar. The Admiral title is given to the
first available player in the following list: William Adama,
Saul Tigh, and Helo Agathon. The Admiral is then given the
two nuke tokens, and the President shuffles the Quorum
deck and draws one Quorum Card.
6. Set Up Loyalty Deck: Set up the Loyalty deck according to
the "Creating the Loyalty Deck" sidebar on page 6.
7. Set Up Other Cards: Shuffle the Quorum deck, Crisis
deck, Super Crisis deck, and Destination deck and then
place them next to the game board. Then separate the
Skill Cards into five decks by type, as shown on their
faces. Shuffle each deck separately, and then place
them (facedown) below the matching colored regions at
the bottom of the game board. Lastly, place the Kobol
Objective Card faceup next to the Destination deck.
8. Receive Skills: Each player, except the starting player,
draws a total of three Skill Cards from among any of the
cards he can draw during his Receive Skills step (see
"Receive Skills Step" on page 9). The starting player does
not receive Skill Cards now, but will draw Skill Cards at the
start of his turn.
9. Create Destiny Deck: Deal two Skill Cards of each skill
type facedown onto the "Destiny deck" space on the game
board and shuffle them thoroughly.
10. Set Up Ships: Place one basestar and three raiders in
front of Galactica. Then place two vipers below Galactica
and two civilian ships behind Galactica (as shown below).
Ship Setup at the Start of the Game
Installing
Resource Dials
Before playing the game for the first time, attach the four
resource dials to the game board. These dials are used
to track the fleet's dwindling resources throughout each
game. To attach a dial, simply push one side of a plastic
connector through the board, and the other side through
the dial. Then push them together until they fit snugly
together. Once attached, they should not be removed.
The number a given dial shows represents how much of
that particular resource is available at that time. When
a resource is lost or gained for any reason, its dial is
rotated to indicate the new total. If any resource is
reduced to zero (at the end of a player's turn), then the
human players lose the game.
Battlestar Galactica

OBJECT OF THE GAME:
The object of the game for a given player depends on which
team he belongs to. A player's team is determined by the
Loyalty Cards he receives throughout the game (see "Loyalty
Cards" on page 18).
All human players win the game if they travel at least eight
units of distance (as specified by the Kobol Objective Card; see
page 14) and then jump one final time (see "Human Objective"
on page 12).
All Cylon players win the game by preventing the humans
from reaching their objective. They usually accomplish this
goal by running the fleet out of a resource (food, fuel, morale,
or population), but can also win by destroying Galactica
(see "Damage Tokens" on page 25) or successfully invading
Galactica with centurion boarding parties (see "Activate
Heavy Raiders and Centurions" on page 24).
CREATING THE LOYALTY DECK:
1. Organize Loyalty Cards: Remove the "You Are a Sympathizer"
card from the Loyalty deck. Then separate
the remainder of the deck into two piles ("You Are Not
a Cylon" and "You are a Cylon"). Shuffle the "You Are a
Cylon" pile.
2. Create Deck: Deal the appropriate number of "You
Are a Cylon" and "You are not a Cylon" cards into the
Loyalty deck as listed below.
Three Players: Create a six-card deck consisting of:
1x "You Are a Cylon" card
5x "You Are Not a Cylon" cards
Four Players: Create a seven-card deck consisting of:
1x "You Are a Cylon" card
6x "You Are Not a Cylon" cards
Five Players: Create a 10-card deck consisting of:
2x "You Are a Cylon" cards
8x "You Are Not a Cylon" cards
Six Players: Create an 11-card deck consisting of:
2x "You Are a Cylon" cards
9x "You Are Not a Cylon" cards
3. Adjust Deck for Characters: Add one extra "You Are
Not a Cylon" card for each "Gauis Baltar" or "Sharon
Valerii" character playing.
4. Shuffle and Distribute: Shuffle the deck thoroughly
and then deal one Loyalty Card facedown to each
player.
5. Add Sympathizer: If playing a four or six player game,
add the "You Are a Sympathizer" card to the deck and
then shuffle it.
6. Place Deck: Place the remaining Loyalty deck next to
the game board. All extra Loyalty Cards (i.e., those not
added to the deck) are placed back in the game box
without looking at them.
Choosing Optimal
Characters
When choosing characters, it is important to be aware
of which characters have already been chosen. The last
player, in particular, should take the skill sets of other
players' characters into account when making his own
choice. For example, if no other players have chosen a
character with the engineering skill, it may be a good idea
to choose one who does have it.
Battlestar Galactica 7
Setup Diagram
1. Loyalty Deck
2. Destination Deck and Kobol Objective
3. President Title Card and Starting Quorum Card
4. Centurion, Damage, Civilian Ship, and Basestar Tokens
5. Quorum Deck
6. Destiny Deck
7. Plastic Human Ships in the "Reserves"
8. Resource Dials (set to starting positions)
9. Plastic Cylon Ships
10. Character Tokens (on setup locations)
11. Admiral Title Card and Nuke Tokens
12. Super Crisis Deck
13. Crisis Deck
14. Skill Decks (separated by type)
15. Current Player Token
16. A Player's Piloting Token
17. A Player's Character Sheet
18. A Player's Starting Hand of Skill Cards (note that the
starting player does not have a starting hand)
19. A Player's Loyalty Card
8 Battlestar Galactica
Game Board Breakdown
1. Destiny Deck Location: Two cards of each Skill Card
type are placed here to form the Destiny Deck. Two
cards from this deck are added to every skill check.
2. Damaged Viper Box: When a viper is damaged, it is
placed here.
3. Viper and Raptor Reserves: All vipers and raptors that
have not been launched, damaged, or destroyed are
placed here. This space is often referred to as simply
the "Reserves."
4. Resource Dials: These dials keep track of the fleet's
dwindling resources.
5. Colonial One Locations: These locations may be moved
to and activated by human players. Players must discard
a Skill Card to move between Colonial One and Galactica.
6. Cylon Locations: When a Cylon player is revealed, his
character token is moved to, and then among, these
locations. Other players may never move to or activate
these locations.
7. Jump Preparation Track: The fleet marker is placed on
this track, and marks how close the fleet is to jumping.
8. Boarding Party Track: Centurion markers are placed
on this track. If a centurion marker reaches the end of
this track, then the humans lose the game.
9. Space Areas: Basestars, civilian, and plastic ships are
placed in these six areas, each separated by thick blue
lines. The concentric circles in space areas have no
game effect.
10. Galactica Location: These locations may be moved
to and activated by the human players. Players must
discard a Skill Card to move between Galactica and
Colonial One.
11. Hazard Locations: These two locations have ongoing
negative effects. Players may never voluntarily move to
these locations.
12. Viper Launch Icons: These icons represent the space
areas in which vipers may be launched. Note that there
are no launch icons on the other side of Galactica
because, thematically, the starboard hangar deck was a
museum and later housed refugees.
13. Skill Deck Regions: These colored regions mark where
the appropriate Skill decks should be placed.
Front of
Galactica
Back of
Galactica
Battlestar Galactica

GAME TURN:
Battlestar Galactica: The Board Game is played over a
number of game turns. Starting with the first player and
proceeding clockwise, players take complete game turns in
order until either the human or Cylon players have won the
game. Each game turn consists of the following steps, carried
out in order:
1. Receive Skills Step: The current player draws the number
and types of Skill Cards listed on his character sheet (see
"Receive Skills Step" on this page).
2. Movement Step: The current player may move to a different
location. If he moves to a different ship (from Galactica
to Colonial One or vice versa), he must discard one Skill
Card from his hand.
3. Action Step: The current player chooses one action to
perform. Options include the actions listed on his location,
character sheet, and Skill Cards (see the full list of actions
on page 10).
4. Crisis Step: The top card of the Crisis deck is drawn and
then resolved (see "Crisis Step" on page 10).
5. Activate Cylon Ships Step (if necessary): If any are in
play, Cylon ships are activated according to the Crisis Card
drawn (see "Activate Cylon Ships Step" on page 11).
6. Prepare for Jump Step (if necessary): If the Crisis Card
has the "prepare for jump" icon on it (see "Prepare for
Jump Step" on page 11), the fleet token advances one
space up the Jump Preparation track. If the token reaches
the end of this track, then the fleet jumps (see "Jumping
the Fleet" on page 13).
After the Prepare for Jump step, the current player's turn
is over, and he hands the current player token clockwise to
the player on his left. This player then begins his turn starting
with the Receive Skills step.
Game Turn Detail
The following section explains each step of a player's turn in
detail.
Receive Skills Step
During this step, the current player draws Skill Cards
according to the skill set listed on his character sheet. The
player always draws the cards listed on his character sheet
regardless of the number of cards already in his hand.
William Adama's Skill Set
Example: It is William Adama's Receive Skills step. He looks at
his skill set, which lists 3 leadership and 2 tactics. He therefore
draws three leadership Skill Cards and two tactics cards.
Some character sheets list multi-colored skills known as
multi-skills. When a character with a multi-skill receives Skill
Cards, he must first decide how many cards he will draw from
each type. The total number of cards that he draws must be
equal to the number listed on his sheet.
Example of a Multi-Skill
Example: It is the start of Lee "Apollo" Adama's turn. He therefore
draws two piloting and one tactics Skill Cards according
to the skill set listed on his character sheet. He may then
decide to draw two leadership or two politics Skill Cards  or
one of each  since he has a 2 leadership/politics multi-skill.
Battlestar Galactica
Movement Step
During this step, the current player may move his character
token to another location if he wishes. If he moves to a different
ship, he must discard one Skill Card from his hand. Human
characters may not move to Cylon locations, and revealed
Cylons may only move to Cylon locations.
Example: It is Lee "Apollo" Adama's movement step, and he
wishes to move from "Command" (on Galactica) to the "Press
Room" (on Colonial One). He discards a piloting Skill Card from
his hand and moves to the "Press Room" location.
If the player's character is piloting a viper, he may move to an
adjacent space area during this step, or may discard a Skill
Card to move to a location on Galactica or Colonial One and
return his viper to the "Reserves."
Action Step
During this step, the current player chooses one action to
perform. The action types are listed below, and are usually
identified by the word "Action:" followed by an ability.
Activate Location: The player may perform the action
listed on his character's current location.
Skill Card Action: The player may play a Skill Card from
his hand to perform the action specified on the card. Note
that not all Skill Cards have actions on them (see "Skill
Cards" on page 15).
 Character Action: The player may perform an action
listed on his character sheet. Note that only some character
sheets have actions listed on them.
 Activate his Viper: If the player is piloting a viper, he may
activate it to move or to attack a Cylon ship.
 Title and Quorum Cards: If the player has a Title or Quorum
Card that provides him with an action, then he may
perform it during this step.
 Loyalty Card: The character may reveal one of his "You
are a Cylon" Loyalty Cards to perform the specified action
on it. He then follows the rules for revealed Cylon players
on page 19.
 Do Nothing: If the player does not wish to perform any
actions, he may decide to do nothing during this step and
proceed to the Crisis step.
Crisis Step
During this step, the current player draws the top card of
the Crisis deck, reads it aloud, and then resolves it. There are
three types of Crisis Cards: Cylon attacks, skill checks, and
events.
Cylon Attack Crises
These Crisis Cards feature an image of Galactica and some
surrounding ships. When resolving a Cylon attack Crisis Card,
simply follow the steps listed on it. Then discard the card unless
instructed to keep the card in play.
A Cylon Attack Crisis Card
Skill Check Crises
These Crisis Cards list a difficulty and one or more skill types,
listed as colored boxes, in the upper left corner. These cards
are resolved according to the rules for skill checks (see "Skill
Checks" on page 16) and have outcomes based on whether
the players pass or fail the skill check. Some of these cards
give the current player, the President, or the Admiral the
choice to either resolve the skill check or carry out some
alternate instruction.
A Skill Check Crisis Card
Battlestar Galactica 11
Event Crises
Any Crisis Card that is not a Cylon attack or skill check is an
event. These crises have instructions that must be immediately
followed. Some of them provide a decision for the current
player, the President, or the Admiral.
An Event Crisis Card
Activate Cylon Ships Step
If there is at least one Cylon ship in play, then the Cylon ships
may move or attack based on the icon on the bottom left of
the Crisis Card (see "Activating Cylon Ships" on page 22).
The Bottom of a Crisis Card
Prepare for Jump Step
If the drawn Crisis Card has the "prepare for jump" icon
on its lower right corner, then the fleet token moves one
space ahead (toward the "Auto Jump" space) on the Jump
Preparation track. If this causes the token to move to the
"Auto Jump" space, then the fleet jumps to a new destination
(see "Jumping the Fleet" on page 13).
Prepare for Jump Icon
After this step, the current player's turn is over. He discards
any Crisis Cards drawn this turn, and hands the current
player token to the player on his left, who begins his turn
(starting with the Receive Skills step).
Core Rules
This section explains the core components and rules of the
game. In particular, this section focuses on the human players
and describes characters, jumping the fleet, and skills.
Characters
Each player takes on the role of a character from the Battlestar
Galactica universe. Each character has different
strengths and weaknesses as listed on his character sheet.
The following information can be found on each character
sheet.
 Character Type: Each character has a type listed on his
character sheet. This type only matters during setup,
and exists to help players choose a well-rounded group of
characters.
 Character Abilities: Each character has two positive
abilities and one negative ability. Some of these abilities
are passive (always affecting the character) while others
require the player to use them as an action (see "Action
Step" on page 10).
Losing Resources
The four resources (fuel, food, morale, and population)
are all vital to the survival of humanity. These resources
are usually lost due to Crisis Cards, civilian ships being
destroyed, or Galactica damage tokens.
Crisis cards list resource loss as text, for example "1
population," while tokens list resource loss as a number
of red icons. For example, one red population icon means
the same as "1 population." The list of resource icons is
found below as well as on the game board.
Whenever a resource is lost for any reason, the appropriate
resource dial is adjusted to represent the new total.
The red color on the resource wheels tells players when
a resource is half (or less) full, and is used by sympathizer
Loyalty Cards (see page 18).
Battlestar Galactica
Skill Set: Each character sheet lists the skills the
character has expertise in. At the start of the player's
turn, he gains the number and types of Skill Cards listed
in his character's skill set. When a character is allowed to
draw Skill Cards of an unspecified type, they must be from
within his skill set unless specified otherwise.
Example: William Adama is in the "Research Lab" and
uses the action listed there to draw one tactics or one
engineering card. He may choose to draw engineering
even though it is outside his skill set, because the location
specifies the card type.
 Setup: Each character has setup instructions on his
card. This usually lists the location where the character
is placed at the beginning of the game. Some characters
have special instructions (such as "Apollo," whose sheet
instructs the player to launch a viper and place him in it as
a pilot).
Each character is represented by a stand-up character token,
which is used to track his location on the game board. After
the character tokens are punched out, each one is attached
to a plastic character stand.
Title Cards:
Title and Quorum Cards provide powerful abilities to the
player who controls them. Title Cards are assigned at the
beginning of the game, but may change hands through the
use of certain locations or because of cetain Crisis Cards. In
addition to the abilities listed below, the President and Admiral
are given many important decisions to make by Crisis Cards.
The President and Quorum Cards
The President starts the game with one Quorum Card in
his hand and can draw more using the President Title Card,
or "President's Office" location. These cards provide special
actions that only the President can perform and provide him
a wide range of powerful abilities.
Whichever player has the President title has control over
this hand of Quorum Cards. These cards are kept secret, and
there is no limit to the number of cards that may be in the
President's hand.
The Admiral:
The Admiral has two important abilities. First off, he
starts the game with two nuke tokens. These tokens can
be devastatingly effective against basestars, but are an
extremely limited resource.
Second, the Admiral is the player who decides which
destination the fleet travels to when jumping (see "Jumping
the Fleet" on the following page). This decision can be
extremely beneficial or harmful to the human players.
Human Objective:
For the human players to win the game, they must successfully
jump the fleet enough times to reach Kobol. Once the fleet
has reached Kobol, the humans immediately win the game.
For information on the Cylon players' objective, see "Cylon
Objective" on page 18.
The fleet jumps to a new location in one of two ways.
1. The fleet token is moved to the "Auto Jump" space of the
Jump Preparation track (see "Prepare for Jump Step" on
page 11).
2. A player activates the "FTL Control" location. If the fleet
jumps this way, then some population may be lost (see "FTL
Control Jump" on the following page).
Character Sheets
1. Name
2. Character Type
(Political Leader, Military Leader, Pilot, or Support)
3. Positive Abilities
4. Negative Ability
5. Setup Location
6. Skill Set
Battlestar Galactica
Jumping the Fleet
In Battlestar Galactica, moving ships at faster-than-light
(FTL) speed is referred to as "jumping." Whenever the fleet
jumps, the Admiral draws Destination Cards to determine
where the fleet jumps to. To choose the destination, the
Admiral performs the following steps:
1. Remove Ships: Remove all ships from the game board
(see "Jumping During Combat" on page 25).
2. Choose Destination: The Admiral draws two cards from
the Destination deck, chooses one, and places the other
on the bottom of the deck.
3. Follow Instructions: The Admiral places the chosen card
faceup next to the Kobol Objective Card and follows any
instructions on the Destination Card.
4. Kobol Instructions: If the previous step causes the total
distance on Destination Cards placed adjacent to the
Kobol Objective Card to equal or exceed four or eight for
the first time, then follow the instructions on the Kobol
Objective Card (see page 14).
5. Reset Jump Preparation Track: Move the fleet token to
the start space of the Jump Preparation track.
FTL Control Jump
If the fleet marker has moved to one of the blue spaces of
the Jump Preparation track, players may force the fleet to
jump using the "FTL Control" location. If the fleet jumps due to
someone activating this location, there is a chance that the
fleet will lose some population.
The current player rolls the die, and if a "6" or lower is rolled,
then a number of population is lost equal to the number listed
on the current space of the Jump Preparation track. Players
then follow all steps for "Jumping the Fleet" on this page.
Example: The fleet token is on the second-to-last space of the
Jump Preparation track (the 1 population space). The current
player activates the "FTL Control" location to jump the
fleet. He rolls a die, and it is a "5" (which is "6" or less), so the
fleet loses 1 population.
Destination Cards
Each Destination Card has two important pieces of
information on it. In the center of the card are the special
effects of traveling to this destination. These effects usually
include losing fuel or other resources and/or following
special instructions. The effects of a Destination Card are
immediately followed when the fleet travels to that destination.
The bottom of each Destination Card lists a distance number.
After the special effects of the card are followed, it is placed
faceup next to the Kobol Objective Card, so that the total
distance the fleet has traveled can easily be seen.
Distance on Destination Cards
Using Abilities
Character sheets, Skill Cards, Loyalty Cards, and Quorum
Cards can all provide abilities to players. Many abilities
are prefaced with the word "Action" followed by a colon,
which means that the character may only use it as his
action during his Action step.
All other abilities do not require an action, and are used
when specified. If multiple players wish to use an ability at
the same time, the current player decides the order.
Example: An unmanned viper has just been attacked by a
raider and an "8" is rolled. Starbuck plays an "Evasive Maneuvers"
piloting card, which allows her to reroll the die.
14 Battlestar Galactica
Kobol Objective Card
The Kobol Objective Card lists important information,
including when additional Loyalty Cards are dealt out and
how the human players can win the game. When the fleet
equals or exceeds a listed distance total for the first time, the
players perform the following instructions. These instructions
are also summarized on the Kobol Objective Card.
 Sleeper Agents: When four or more units of distance
have been traveled, the remaining Loyalty Cards are dealt
out (see "Sleeper Agents Phase" on page 18).
 Reach Kobol: After eight or more units of distance have
been traveled, the humans are only one jump away from
winning the game. The next time the humans jump, they do
not draw a Destination Card; instead, they simply win the
game (as long as every resource is higher than 0).
Example: The human players have 1 population resource
remaining and have traveled 8 units of distance. William
Adama uses the "FTL Control" location to jump the fleet.
The humans will win the game due to this jump, as long as
they do not lose any population due to the "FTL Control"
location.
Example of Jumping
1. During the Prepare for Jump step, the current Crisis
Card has the prepare for jump icon. The fleet marker is
moved one space ahead on the Jump Preparation track.
Since this causes the token to enter the Auto Jump
space, the fleet jumps. All ships are removed from the
game board.
2. The Admiral draws the top two cards of the Destination
deck and chooses one to play faceup. The other card is
returned to the bottom of the deck.
3. The chosen card is placed faceup next to the Kobol
Objective Card. The instructions on the Destination Card
are then followed (in this case, to lose 1 fuel and destroy
1 raptor).
4. If this had caused the total distance to equal or
exceed four (or eight) units for the first time, then the
instructions on the Kobol Card would be followed. In this
example, nothing happens since neither of these totals
was exceeded for the first time.
5. The fleet token is moved back to the start of the Jump
Preparation track.

Skill Cards
At the start of each player's turn, he draws the number and
types of Skill Cards indicated by his skill set (listed on his
character sheet). These are always drawn regardless of how
many cards are already in his hand. These cards are used
to overcome skill checks or to provide players with special
actions (and other abilities) that they can perform. Each skill
type specializes in different strategies:
Politics: This skill represents a character's ability to
control morale and help the fleet overcome crises. This
is the most common skill type required by Crisis Cards.
Some politics cards also provide the ability to allow a
player draw Skill Cards from outside his skill set.
Leadership: This skill represents a character's ability to
take charge of situations and command other individuals.
This is the second-most common skill type required by
Crisis Cards. Some leadership cards allow players to move
other characters and grant them a bonus action.
Tactics: This skill type represents a character's ability to
plan missions as well as to physically overcome obstacles.
Tactics cards allow players to gain bonuses to die rolls as
well as scout the galaxy for new destinations.
Piloting: This skill represents a character's ability to fly
vipers. Piloting cards allow players to reroll enemy attack
rolls as well as gain additional attacks.
Engineering: This skill represents a character's strength
in the mechanical and scientific fields. Some engineering
cards allow players to repair vipers and locations aboard
Galactica.

If a player has more than 10 Skill Cards in his hand at the end
of any player's turn, he must discard cards (of his choice) until
he has only 10. This hand limit does not include other cards,
such as Quorum Cards or Super Crisis Cards that may be in a
player's hand.
Whenever a player discards a Skill Card, it is placed in a
discard pile faceup next to the appropriate Skill deck. When
a deck runs out of Skill Cards, the discard pile is shuffled to
create a new Skill deck.
Destiny Deck
At the start of the game, a deck of 10 Skill Cards (two of each
type) is created and shuffled. Two random cards from this
deck are placed into each skill check, and add an element of
uncertainty.
After the last card from the Destiny deck is played, the
current player creates a new one by dealing out two cards of
each skill type. He then shuffles those cards thoroughly and
places them on the appropriate space on the game board.
The Destiny Deck Space on the Game Board
16 Battlestar Galactica
Skill Checks
Many Crisis Cards and game board locations require skill
checks. Skill checks represent struggles and challenges that
require particular skill types to overcome. They are always
represented by a difficulty number (listed first) followed by
the necessary skill types (colored boxes). All skill checks are
resolved as follows:
1. Read Card: The current player reads the entire card (or
location) out loud to all players. Players may then discuss
what they would like to do (following the guidelines under
"Secrecy Rules" on page 20). If the card requires the current
player, the President, or the Admiral to make a choice,
he must make the decision at this time. Any choice that
does not have a pass/fail effect requires players to carry
out specific instructions instead of a making a skill check.
2. Play from Destiny Deck: Two cards from the Destiny deck
are dealt facedown together, starting a common pile. This
pile can be placed on the Battlestar Galactica logo of the
game board, or any common area that is in reach of all
players.
3. Play Skills: Starting with the player that is to the left of
the current player (and ending with the current player),
each player may play any number of Skill Cards from
his hand facedown to the common pile. Any text on the
Skill Cards played onto the pile in this manner is ignored.
Only the strength and types of skills on each Skill Card is
relevant when played into a skill check.
4. Shuffle and Divide Cards: After each player has had one
opportunity to play Skill Cards, the current player takes
all Skill Cards from the pile and shuffles them. (The cards
are shuffled so none of the players will know which players
contributed which cards to the pile.) He then deals them
faceup into two new piles. All cards that match a skill type
(color) listed on the Crisis Card are placed in one pile, and
all other cards (i.e., those that do not match) are placed in
the other pile.
5. Total Strength: The total strength (upper left number) of
each card pile is totaled. The total strength of the nonmatching
pile is subtracted from the total strength of the
matching pile, giving a final strength.
6. Determine Result: If the final strength is equal to or
greater than the skill check's difficulty, then the "pass"
result of the skill check is carried out. Otherwise, the "fail"
result is followed. All Skill Cards contributed toward the
skill check are then discarded into the appropriate discard
piles.
Partial Passes
Some skill checks have a partial pass number listed between
the "pass" and "fail" results. If the skill check is not passed,
but this partial pass number is equaled or exceeded, then this
result is followed (instead of the "pass" or "fail" results).
A Crisis Card with a Partial Pass Result
Skill Supervisor
Although it is technically the current player's responsibility
to make sure that Skill Cards are discarded properly,
many play groups prefer to assign one player the role of
SKILL SUPERVISOR at the start of the game.
This player is in charge of sorting discarded Skill Cards
into the appropriate discard piles. In addition, when a Skill
deck runs out, this player is responsible for reshuffling
the appropriate discard pile to form a new deck. Lastly,
when the Destiny deck runs out, this player is in charge
of creating a new Destiny deck (by collecting two of each
Skill Card type and then shuffling them together).

Example of a Skill Check
During his Crisis step, t 1. he current player draws the
"Fulfiller of Prophecy" Crisis Card. He reads it aloud and
must choose whether to perform a skill check (the top
option) or resolve the bottom section. He chooses the
top option, and will therefore resolve a skill check.
2. Two cards from the Destiny deck are dealt into a
common pile.
3. The player to the current player's left plays two Skill
Cards into the pile. The next player decides not to play
any cards, and finally, the current player plays a single
card.
4. The current player shuffles the pile of cards and divides
them into two new piles. Cards that match the skill
types on the Crisis Card are placed in one pile, and nonmatching
cards are placed in the other.
5. Both piles are individually totaled. The non-matching pile
total of "3" is then subtracted from the matching pile of
total "6," providing a final strength of "3."
6. Since the final strength did not equal or exceed the difficulty
of the skill check, the "fail" result is performed. The
fleet loses 1 population, and the current player adjusts
the population resource dial (from 12 to 11).

Game Board Skill Checks:
Three game board locations  "Administration," "Admiral's
Quarters," and the "Brig,"  instruct the player using the
location to carry out a skill check. In these cases, a skill check
is resolved (following the rules on page 16). The specific rules
for skill checks at these locations are found below:
Administration: The current player
chooses any player to nominate for
the presidency. A 5 difficulty politics/
leadership skill check is resolved with
the following results.
Pass: The nominated player claims
the President title.
Fail: No Effect.
Admiral's Quarters: The current
player chooses any character to
accuse. A 7 difficulty leadership/
tactics skill check is resolved with the
following results.
Pass: The accused character is
moved to the "Brig."
Fail: No Effect.
Brig: The current player attempts
to escape the "Brig" location. A 7
difficulty politics/tactics skill check is
resolved with the following results.
Pass: The current player may
move his character to any space on
Galactica.
Fail: No Effect.
Cylon Players
In each game, there will be at least one Cylon player working
against the humans. The number of Cylon players varies
based upon the number of people playing the game.
Cylon Objective
For the Cylon players to win the game, they must prevent the
humans from completing the Kobol Objective. There are three
possible ways of doing this:
Run Out a Resource: If at least one resource is depleted
to 0 or less at the end of a player's turn, the game
immediately ends and the Cylon players win. This is the
most common way the Cylons to win. Note that it is
possible for the human players to reach 0 of a resource
type and then increase it during the same turn without
losing the game.
Centurion Invasion: If at least one centurion marker
reaches the end of the Boarding Party track, then the
crew of the Galactica are killed and the Cylon players win
(see "Activate Heavy Raiders and Centurions" on page 24).
 Galactica Destroyed: If six or more locations on Galactica
have damage tokens on them at the same time, then
Galactica is destroyed and the Cylon players win (see
"Damage Tokens" on page 25).
Loyalty Cards
Each player starts the game with one Loyalty Card. Later
in the game, players receive additional Loyalty Cards (see
"Sleeper Agent Phase" on page 19), which increase their
chances of being Cylon players.
Loyalty Cards are kept facedown, but their owners may look
at them at any time. A player may not look at other players'
Loyalty Cards unless specifically allowed to do so by a card
or ability. When a player is allowed to look at a single Loyalty
Card belonging to a player who has more than one, the card
viewed is selected randomly.
Each Loyalty Card specifies whether the controlling player is
a Cylon, is not a Cylon, or is a Sympathizer (see "Sympathizer"
on page 19).
Important: If a player has at least one "You are a Cylon" card,
then he is a Cylon player and ignores all "You are not a Cylon"
cards that he may have.
Sleeper Agent Phase
Once the fleet has traveled at least four distance, each
player (including revealed Cylon players) is dealt one card
from the top of the Loyalty deck. If a player receives a "You
are a Sympathizer" card, then he must immediately reveal
and resolve it. If he is a revealed Cylon player, then he may
first give the card to any other player (who then immediately
resolves it).
Sympathizer
In addition to human and Cylon players, there may be a
Sympathizer inside the fleet. The "You Are a Sympathizer"
card represents a human or Cylon who wishes to side with
the other team, and is only used in a four or six player game.
This card is not added to the Loyalty deck until after the initial
Loyalty Cards have been dealt out.
A player who receives this card must immediately reveal it. If
at least 1 resource is half full or lower (in the red zone), then
the player is moved to the "Brig" location. This card is then
treated as a "You Are Not a Cylon" card.
If every resource is more than half full (not in the red zone),
then this player becomes a revealed Cylon player for the
remainder of the game and follows the game turn steps
described under "Revealed Cylon Players" on this page (except
for steps "4" and "5.") This player may never activate the
"Cylon Fleet" location or play Super Crisis Cards.
The Sympathizer Loyalty Card
Revealed Cylon Players
A player who has a "You are a Cylon" Loyalty Card may reveal
it as an action. After a player has revealed himself as a Cylon,
he performs the following steps:
1. Discard: The player discards down to three Skill Cards.
2. Lose Titles: If the player had any Title Cards, they are given
to a different player (see "Line of Succession" on page 28).
3. Resurrect: The player moves his character token to the
"Resurrection Ship" Cylon location.
4. Receive Super Crisis: The player receives one random
Super Crisis Card. This card remains in his hand and may
be played by activating the "Caprica" Cylon location. Super
Crisis Cards are treated like normal Crisis Cards, but are
immune to all character abilities that affect Crisis Cards.
5. End Turn: The player's turn then ends, and the current
player token is passed to the player on his left. Note that
a player who reveals himself as a Cylon does not draw
a Crisis Card at the end of this turn, or any of his future
turns (see "Revealed Cylon Players' Turns," below).
Determining if You Are a Cylon
Carl "Helo" Agathon has two Loyalty Cards, one "You Are
a Cylon" card and one "You Are Not a Cylon" card. Since
he has at least one "You are a Cylon" card, he is a Cylon
player. He may reveal himself on his turn (as an action) to
perform the special ability listed on his Loyalty Card. If he
does so, he becomes a revealed Cylon player (see below).
Revealed Cylon Players' Turns
On a revealed Cylon player's turn, he does not receive Skill
Cards based on his skill set or draw Crisis Cards. He simply
draws 2 cards, moves to any Cylon location, and then may use
the action on it.
1. Draw Skills Step: The Cylon player may draw two Skill
Cards of any type(s).
2. Movement Step: The Cylon player may move to any other
Cylon location.
3. Action Step: The Cylon player may perform the action
listed on his current location. Revealed Cylons may not
perform other actions, such as those found on Skill Cards
or Quorum Cards. All of the abilities listed on a revealed
Cylon player's character sheet are also ignored.
Important Note: There are no "Activate Cylon Ship" and
"Prepare for Jump" steps during a revealed Cylon player's turn.
Revealed Cylons and Crises
Although revealed Cylon players do not automatically draw
a Crisis Card on their turn, they may draw and play a Crisis
Card by using the "Caprica" Cylon location. When a revealed
Cylon player draws a Crisis Card that poses a choice for the
current player, that player makes the decision.
Revealed Cylon players are unaffected by abilities on Crisis
Cards and skill checks. They cannot be sent to the "Brig" or
"Sickbay" locations, and cannot be forced to discard Skill Cards.
Revealed Cylon Players' Skill Cards
Revealed Cylon players only draw two Skill Cards on their
turns. A revealed Cylon player may  at his option  play one
(and only one) Skill Card into each skill check that is resolved.
Revealed Cylon players may not use actions or abilities listed
on Skill Cards. They must continue to obey the hand limit rule,
and discard down to 10 Skill Cards at the end of each player's
turn.
The Destiny deck is still used after a Cylon player has been
revealed.
Secrecy
A key element of Battlestar Galactica: The Board Game
is the paranoia and tension surrounding the hidden Cylon
players. Because of this, secrecy is very important, and
the following rules must be observed at all times:
 Blind Accusations: Players may accuse each other
of being Cylon operatives at any time. Although these
blind accusations have no game rule effects, they can
help, or confuse, the human players in their hunt to
find the Cylons.
 Open Accusations: Should one player gain the ability
to look at another player's Loyalty Cards, he may
choose to keep this information to himself, share it
with the group, or even lie about it.
 Skill Cards and Skill Checks: Players are prohibited
from revealing the exact strength of cards in their
hands. They may use vague terms such as "I can help
out on this crisis a little bit," but they may not make
more specific statements such as "I am playing 5
piloting." In addition, after a skill check is resolved,
players may not identify which cards they played.
The reason for these restrictions is to keep hidden
information secret and to protect Cylon players from
being discovered too easily.
 Cards in the Decks: If a player has the ability to look
at cards on the top of a deck, he may not disclose
specific information about that card.
 Revealed Cylons: Revealed Cylon players must also
follow all rules of secrecy. They may not show their
hands to other players and may not say which Super
Crisis Card they have in their hands.
Battlestar Galactica 21
Ship Reference
Galactica
This large ship leads and
defends the human fleet,
and is depicted in the
center of the game board.
There are many locations
on Galactica where
characters can take
different actions.
Colonial One
This ship, smaller than
Galactica, is the President's
base of operations and is
depicted at the top of the
game board. There are several
locations on Colonial One where
characters can take different actions.
Vipers
These plastic ships are used by the
humans to defend their fleet and to
attack Cylon ships. Vipers are placed
in the "Reserves," "Damaged Vipers,"
or space areas of the game board.
Raptors
These plastic ships are used by the
humans to scout for new destinations,
as well as to attempt to find more
resources (such as fuel and food). These
ships are never used in combat and
remain in the "Reserves" until destroyed.
Civilian Ships
These small tokens represent
unarmed human ships.
When one of these ships is
destroyed, the resources
(usually population) listed on
the face of the token are lost.
These ships are always kept
facedown.
Basestars
These large Cylon ships are
represented by large punchboard
tokens. These ships are often
placed in different space areas
and can both attack Galactica
directly and launch raiders and
heavy raiders.
Raiders
These plastic ships are used by the
Cylons to attack the fleet. These fragile
ships are plentiful, and often attack
vipers and civilian ships.
Heavy Raiders
These plastic ships are used by the
Cylons to land boarding parties on
Galactica. These ships never attack
other ships; their sole purpose is to
reach the hangar deck and release
their deadly centurion boarding parties.

COMBAT:
As long as there is at least one Cylon ship on the game board,
the fleet is considered to be in combat. Cylon ships are
activated at the end of each turn, based upon the Crisis Card
drawn. This section describes the details of combat, including
how to activate, attack, and pilot ships.
Cylon Attack Cards
When a Cylon attack Crisis Card is drawn, the following steps
are performed as listed on the card:
1. Activate Existing Cylon Ships: Any existing Cylon ships
are activated based upon the icon(s) listed on the card. If
there are multiple icons listed, they are activated from left
to right, following standard activation rules (see "Activating
Cylon Ships" below).
2. Setup: Place new Cylon ships, vipers, and civilian ships
on the game board as illustrated on the card. Vipers are
always placed from the "Reserves" and civilian ships are
always drawn randomly from among those in the stockpile
and are placed on the game board facedown.
3. Special Rules: Most Cylon attack Crisis Cards have a
special rule on them, which is followed at this time.
A Cylon attack card is discarded once these three steps have
been carried out, unless the card specifies "Keep this card in
play," in which case it has an ongoing ability that usually lasts
until the fleet jumps.
Activating Cylon Ships
While in combat, the Cylon ships are activated after the
Resolve Crisis step of each player's turn. Activating a ship
causes it to either move or attack. Cylon ships are always
activated according to the rules below, even if there is a
revealed Cylon player.
If multiple space areas contain ships that need to be
activated, the ships are activated one entire space area at
a time in the order of the current player's choice. Each Cylon
ship can only be activated once on a given player's turn.
Activate Raiders
Activate Raiders Icon
When activated, each Cylon raider carries out only one of the
actions listed below, taking only the first action that it is able
to perform (in numerical priority, with "Attack a Viper" taking
the highest priority and "Attack Galactica" taking the lowest).
1. Attack a Viper: The raider attacks a viper in its space
area. It attacks an unmanned viper if able; otherwise it attacks
a piloted viper.
2. Destroy Civilian Ship: If there are no vipers in its area, the
raider destroys one civilian ship in its area. The current
player chooses a civilian ship in the area and flips it over.
The resources listed on its face are lost, and the token is
removed from the game.
3. Move: If there are no civilian ships in the area, the viper
moves one space area towards the nearest civilian ship. If
several civilian ships are equidistant, it moves clockwise
around Galactica.
4. Attack Galactica: If there are no civilian ships on the game
board, the raider attacks Galactica (see "Attacking" on
page 24).
If there are no raiders on the game board when raiders are
activated, two raiders are launched from each basestar. If
there are no basestars in play, then nothing happens.
Example: The current Crisis Card has been resolved and has the
activate raider icon on it. All Cylon raiders on the game board
(they are all in the same area) are activated. The first raider
attacks a viper in its area and destroys it. As a result, there
are no vipers or civilian ships in the second raider's area, so it
moves to an adjacent space (towards the nearest civilian ship).
Launch Raiders
Launch Raiders Icon
When the launch raiders icon appears, each basestar
launches three raiders. If there are no basestars in play, then
nothing happens.
Whenever a raider (or heavy raider) is launched, the current
player takes a ship of the specified type from among those
not currently on the game board. He then places it in the
launching basestar's area. If all of the raiders are on the game
board, then no more raiders may be launched.

Activating Cylon Raiders
During the Activate Cylon Ship 1. s step, the current Crisis
Card has the activate raiders icon. There are multiple
raiders on the board, so the current player chooses an
area and activates the raiders in that area (one at a
time).
2. The first raider attacks a viper in its area, rolls a "5," and
damages the viper.
3. The other raider in the area does not have any vipers
to attack, so it destroys a civilian ship in its area. The
civilian ship token is turned over, and the resources on
its face (2 population) are lost.
4. The next area to be activated has a single raider in it.
Since there are no ships in its area, the ship moves
towards the nearest civilian ship (clockwise). The next
time the raider is activated, it will most likely destroy
the civilian ship in its area.

Activate Heavy Raiders and Centurions
Activate Heavy Raiders and Centurions Icon
Heavy raiders never attack. They always move towards the
nearest space area containing a viper launch icon. If a heavy
raider starts its movement in a space with a viper launch
icon, the centurions on it board Galactica.
A Viper Launch Icon
When centurions from a heavy raider board Galactica,
that heavy raider is removed from the game board, and a
centurion token is placed on the start space of the Boarding
Party track. Whenever there are any centurion tokens on the
Boarding Party track and heavy raiders are activated (even
by a revealed Cylon player), each centurion token moves one
space towards the "Humans Lose" space. If a centurion token
reaches the end of the track, then the Cylons win the game.
The Boarding Party Track
The human players can attempt to destroy centurions by
activating the "Armory" location on the game board.
If there are no heavy raiders on the game board when heavy
raiders are activated, one heavy raider is launched from
each basestar. If there are no basestars in play, then nothing
happens.
Activate Cylon Basestars
Activate Basestars Icon
When a Cylon basestar is activated, the basestar attacks
Galactica. The current player rolls a die for each basestar on
the game board to find out if the attack damages Galactica
(see "Attacking," on this page).
Attacking
Whenever a ship attacks, the current player rolls an eight-sided
die and consults the entry on the table that corresponds
to the target of the attack (and, sometimes, the method of
the attack). Depending upon the rolled result, the target can
become damaged or be destroyed.
Note that players may never attack human ships with vipers
or with the "Weapon's Control" location.
Damage, Destruction, and Remove from Game
Depending upon the ship type, different things happen if a ship
is damaged or destroyed.
When a Cylon ship is destroyed, it is removed from the game
board, but may return later in the game.
When a viper is damaged, it is placed in the "Damaged
Viper" box of the game board. A viper in this box may not be
launched or used until it has been repaired (usually by an
engineering card).
When a viper or raptor is destroyed, it is removed from the game.
When a civilian ship is destroyed, it is turned faceup. The fleet
then loses the resources (usually population) listed on the
token. The token is then removed from the game.
Attack Table
UNIT ATTACKED DIE RESULT
38 = Destroyed
78 = Destroyed
57 = Damaged
8 = Destroyed
Automatically Destroyed
(no die roll)
With Raider: 8 = Damaged
With Basestar: 48 = Damaged
With Viper: 8 = Damaged
With Galactica: 58 = Damaged
With Nuke: 12 = Damaged Twice
36 = Destroyed
78 = Destroyed and
destroy 3 raiders in
the same area.
Battlestar Galactica 25
Whenever a ship (or other component) is removed from the
game, it is placed in the game box and may not be used for
the remainder of the game.
Damage Tokens
Galactica Damage Token Basestar Damage Token
When a basestar or Galactica is damaged, the current player
draws a random damage token of the appropriate ship type.
Their effects vary depending on the token type.
 Damage Location: When drawn, this
token is placed on the matching location
on Galactica. All characters in this location
are moved to "Sickbay." Characters may
move into a damaged location, but may not
use the action listed on it (until repaired
by an engineering card). When a damaged
location is repaired, return the damage
token to the pile of unused damage tokens
and randomize them
 Lost Resource: When drawn, the fleet
loses the listed resources. This token is
then removed from the game.
 Critical Hit: When drawn, this token is
placed on the basestar. While it remains, it
counts as two damage tokens (it takes three
damage tokens to destroy a basestar).
 Disabled Hanger: When drawn, this token is
placed on the basestar. While it remains, the
basestar may not launch raiders or heavy
raiders.
 Disabled Weapons: When drawn, this token
is placed on the basestar. While it remains,
the basestar may not attack Galactica.
 Structural Damage: When drawn, this
token is placed on the basestar. While it
remains, all attacks against the basestar
gain +2 to their die rolls.
If a basestar receives three or more damage tokens, then it is
destroyed and is removed from the game board. All damage
tokens on it are returned and randomly mixed into the pile of
unused damage tokens.
If six or more areas on Galactica have damage tokens at the
same time, then the Cylon players win the game.
Jumping During Combat
When the fleet jumps during combat, all ships are removed
from the space areas of the game board. Any vipers so
removed are returned to the "Reserves," and any civilian ships
so removed are shuffled back into the pile of unused civilian
ships. Any character who was piloting a viper is moved to the
"Hangar Deck" location.
Any centurion tokens on the Boarding Party track remain in
play when the fleet jumps.
Activating Vipers
Although Galactica does have mounted weaponry, its real
military strength lies in its squadrons of single-man fighters
known as vipers. The main purpose of vipers is to defend the
fleet, particularly civilian ships, from Cylon ships. Vipers are
usually activated by using the "Command" location.
When a player activates a viper, he must choose one of the
following options:
 Launch a Viper: The player takes a viper from the
"Reserves" and places it in one of the two space areas
marked with the viper launch icon (see page 24).
 Move a Viper: The player chooses a viper that is already in
a space area. He may move the viper to an adjacent space
area. Note that vipers may not fly "over" Galactica; they
may only move clockwise or counterclockwise "around" it,
between directly adjacent space areas.
 Attack with a Viper: The player chooses a viper and a
Cylon ship that are in the same space area. He then rolls
one eight-sided die to resolve an attack following the rules
under "Attacking" on page 24.
Each viper may be activated any number of times during a
player's turn, but players may not activate ships that are
being piloted by another player. Vipers without piloting tokens
under them are referred to as unmanned vipers.
26 Battlestar Galactica
Piloting Vipers
All characters who have piloting in their skill set have the
ability to personally pilot a viper. A piloted viper functions
slightly differently than an unmanned viper and may not be
activated using the "Command" location.
A player who wants his character to pilot a viper simply
moves his character to the "Hangar Deck" location and uses
the action listed there. He then launches a viper as normal
(see the previous section), places his piloting token beneath it,
and removes his character token from the game board, placing
it on his character sheet.
Moving and Actions when Piloting
While a character is piloting a viper, his player still takes his
turn as normal. During his Movement step, he may move the
viper to an adjacent space area or move his character back
to a location (see "Moving From a Viper" below).
In addition to the normal things that a player may do during
his Action step (for example, play a Skill Card), he may also
choose to activate his viper (to move again or attack).
Viper Destruction
If a character is piloting a viper when it is damaged or
destroyed, his character token is placed in "Sickbay," and
the viper is placed in the appropriate space (the "Damaged
Vipers" area or back in the game box.)
Moving from a Viper
When the fleet jumps, all characters who were piloting vipers
are placed in the "Hangar Deck," and their vipers are returned
to the "Reserves."
A player may also choose to move to Galactica or Colonial
One from a viper during his Movement step. In order to do
this, he must discard one Skill Card, and then he simply places
his viper in the "Reserves" and his character token on the
location of his choice. He may do this from any space area.
If a player is sent to "Sickbay" or the "Brig" while piloting a
viper, he is moved to the appropriate location, and his viper is
returned to the "Reserves."
Whenever a character moves from piloting a viper to a
location, his piloting token is removed from the game board.
Raptors and Risking
Raptors are not used during combat and are usually "risked"
according to the instructions on Skill and Destination Cards
to receive particular rewards. In order to risk a ship, there
must be at least one of the required type of ship in the
"Reserves." These cards usually instruct the player to roll a
die and receive a reward if he reaches a specified number.
If the die roll is less than the number, then the risked ships
listed on the card are destroyed, and no reward is gained.
A "Launch Scout" Skill Card
Example: The current player plays the "Launch Scout"
tactics card as an action. The card specifies that he may
risk a raptor to look at the top card of the Destination or
Crisis deck. Because there is at least one raptor in the
"Reserves," the player is able to take this action. He rolls a die
as instructed, and rolls a "1." Since this does not reach the
target number of 3, he does not gain the reward and a raptor
is destroyed.
Battlestar Galactica 27
Piloting a Viper and Attacking
"Starbuck" uses the action 1. in the "Hangar Deck" location
to launch herself in a viper. She removes her character
token from the board, launches a viper, and places her
piloting token under it.
2. She may then take another action (as specified on the
"Hangar Deck" location). She decides to use the action to
activate her viper and attack a raider in her area.
3. She rolls a "3," which is exactly enough to destroy the
raider. It is removed from the game board, and she
proceeds to her Crisis Step.
Note that Starbuck may not use her character's "Expert
Pilot" ability (found on her character sheet) in this example
because she was not piloting a viper at the start of her turn.

OTHER RULES:
Detailed in this section are miscellaneous rules, including
the line of succession for the Admiral and President titles,
the way component limitations affect gameplay, and ways to
adjust the game to make it less difficult for either the humans
or Cylons.
Line of Succession
Should the President or Admiral be revealed as a Cylon, the
next player in the line of succession for that title claims it. In
addition, if the Admiral (but not the President) is placed in the
"Brig," then the next player in line claims the Admiral title. If an
Admiral stripped of his title later moves out of the "Brig," he
does not automatically reclaim the title.
The orders of succession are:
Admiral
1. William Adama
2. Saul Tigh
3. Helo Agathon
4. Lee "Apollo" Adama
5. Kara "Starbuck" Thrace
6. Sharon "Boomer" Valerii
7. Galen Tyrol
8. Tom Zarek
9. Gaius Baltar
10. Laura Roslin
President
1. Laura Roslin
2. Gaius Baltar
3. Tom Zarek
4. Lee "Apollo" Adama
5. William Adama
6. Karl "Helo" Agathon
7. Galen Tyrol
8. Sharon "Boomer" Valerii
9. Saul Tigh
10. Kara "Starbuck" Thrace
Note that if the President is in the "Brig," he keeps the President
title and all associated abilities.
Component Limitations
Whenever a deck of cards runs out, the current player
shuffles the appropriate discard pile to form a new deck. This
includes Skill Cards, Quorum Cards, Crisis Cards, Super Crisis
Cards, and Destination Cards.
Tokens and plastic ships are limited to the quantity provided,
and can run out during the game. The current player always
decides the order in which a component type is placed, and if
there are not enough, he decides which ones are not placed.
Example: A Cylon attack Crisis Card is drawn that requires
two basestars to be placed on the game board. There is
already one basestar on the game board, so there is only one
more that can be placed. The current player decides which of
the two basestars listed on the Cylon attack card to place on
the game board.
If all vipers are already in play and a player wishes to activate
the "Hangar Deck" location, he may choose to move a viper
from any space area to the "Reserves" so that he may pilot it.
Adjusting Difficulty
Some play groups may find that it is too easy for the human or
Cylon players to win the game. A group may decide before the
start of the game to make the game easier for the humans or
Cylons.
To make the game easier for the human players, start the
game with 2 more of each resource (10 food, 10 fuel, 12
morale, and 14 population).
To make the game easier for the Cylons, start the game with
2 less of each resource.

Human Player Strategy
The ultimate goal for the human players is to conserve
enough resources to travel eight units of distance and then
jump to Kobol. This makes their immediate goal to preserve
resources, and their long-term goal to travel enough distance.
On the Humans' Turns
Two things need to be taken into account during a human
player's turn: first, which resources are in the most danger,
and second, which actions are available to the player.
Each character type has a particular specialization. For
example, pilots are good at piloting vipers and destroying
Cylon ships, while political leaders are good at overcoming
Crisis Cards and using the Quorum deck.
At the start of the game, it is important to make sure that
resources lost are not all of the same type. For example,
morale is most often lost from Crisis Cards, and the loss of
morale can often get out of control. Alternatively, population
is usually safe from Crisis Cards, but in grave danger when
the Cylons attack.
It is also important to be able to determine when to use the
"FTL Control" location. For example, it is often not a good idea
to use "FTL Control" when population is running low.
Dealing with Cylon Players
The biggest threat to the human players is posed by the
Cylons who have infiltrated the fleet. Human players should
try to keep an eye on the negative Skill Cards that come up
during skill checks and should question each decision made
on Crisis Cards. The sooner the humans can get the Cylon
players into the "Brig" location, the better. A Cylon player in
the "Brig" has limited impact on the game, and is less harmful
if he decides to reveal himself.
Preparing for the Sleeper Agent Phase
It is important for human players to keep in mind that even
if they do not start as a Cylon, that may change during the
Sleeper Agent phase. At the start of the game, it may be a
good strategy for the humans to avoid doing too well, because
one of them may become a Cylon player during the Sleeper
Agent phase. Performing exceptionally well as a human
may make winning the game more difficult for a player who
switches over to the Cylon side.
Cylon Player Strategy
The ultimate goal of the Cylon players is to make sure
the humans lose the game, usually by focusing on a single
resource type and running it down to nothing.
While Unrevealed
During skill checks, Cylon players should find any and all
reasons to avoid helping out. When they do help out, they
should make sure to throw in a negative card (or two) to
cancel out their help. However, Cylon players should be careful
not to look too suspicious and should make sure to use
resource types that other players could have thrown in as
well. Often times, the best way to avoid suspicion is to make
other players seem more suspicious.
It is fairly important for Cylon players to avoid being placed in
the "Brig" while unrevealed. While in the "Brig," Cylon players
cannot use the special ability on their Loyalty Cards (but may
still reveal themselves). It is often worthwhile to throw other
players in the "Brig" to avoid suspicion.
A properly timed reveal can be devastating to the humans.
Cylon players should pay attention to the special ability of
their Loyalty Cards and wait for the perfect time to strike.
While Revealed
Revealed Cylons have one main purpose: to focus on the
weakest resource and destroy it. Morale and population are
usually the two easiest resources to decrease. Morale is
easiest to decrease by Crisis Cards (through the "Caprica"
location), while population is easiest to destroy with Cylon
attacks (using the "Cylon Fleet" location).
Revealed Cylon players should usually draw piloting or
engineering Skill Cards on their turn, since these types
appear on Crisis Cards least frequently.

CARD CLARIFICATIONS:
This section clarifies the effects of some cards.
 Resource Maximums: Although resources can sometimes
be increased by cards, they can never be raised higher
than 15.
 "Food Shortage" Crisis Card: This card causes the
President and current player to discard two cards each.
If the President is the current player, then he must
discard four cards.
 Choice Crises: When a player makes a choice on a Crisis
Card, he can always choose the top or bottom section of
the card, regardless of whether he will be able to fulfill the
game text listed (unless the card specifically restricts this).
Frequently Overlooked
Rules
 Players always draw all Skill Cards indicated on their
character sheet at the start of their turn, regardless of
hand size.
 Ships may only move into adjacent space areas. They may
not move over Galactica.
 When a player receives a "You are a Sympathizer" card, he
must immediately reveal it.
 When using the "FTL Control" location, population is lost
according to the Jump Preparation track on a roll of 6 or
less.
 Each player must discard down to 10 Skill Cards at the
end of every player's turn.
 Players may move out of "Sickbay" without difficulty, but
not the "Brig." They may only move out of the "Brig" by
passing the skill check listed on the location.
 Cylon players may only reveal their Loyalty Cards as an
Action.
 Revealed Cylon players are dealt a Loyalty Card during the
Sleeper Agent phase.
 Cylon ships are always activated according to the "Activate
Cylon Ships" rules (page 22), even if there is a revealed
Cylon player.
 Super Crisis Cards are immune to character abilities that
specifically affect Crisis Cards.

CREDITS:
Game Design and Development: Corey Konieczka
Additional Development: Eric Lang
Executive Developer: Jeff Tidball
Editing and Proofreading: Mark O'Connor and Jeff Tidball
Graphic Design: Kevin Childress, Andrew "Metal" Navaro,
Brian Schomberg, and WiL Springer
Sculpt Direction: Zo Robinson
Cover Composition: Brian Schomberg
Artwork Provided by: NBC Universal
Production Manager: Gabe Laulunen
Publisher: Christian T. Petersen
NBC Universal Consumer Products: Kim Niemi, Mitch Steele,
and Neysa Gordon
SCI FI: William Lee and Mozhgan Setoodeh
Playtester Coordinator: Mike Zebrowski
Playtesters: AJ Anderson, Brett Bedore, Daniel "Banaan"
Bloemendaal, Bryan Bornmueller, Kevin Childress, Daniel
Lovat Clark, Tamara Cook, Chris Corbett, Emile de Maat,
Richard Dewsbury, Jean9 Duncan, Rob Edens, Aaron Fenwick,
Matt Findley, Kevin Fraley, Dave Froggat, Tod Gelle, Jack
Gray, Joe Gray, Edward Gross, Jeremy Haberer, Eric Hanson,
Darrell Hardey, Shannon Heibler, Jeroen Hogenkamp, Stephen
Horvath, Sally Karkula, Shannon Konieczka, Rob Kouba, Eric
Lang, Andy Lawley, Jonathan Ledezma, Erik Lind, Liana Loos-
Austin, Terry Madden, Bob Maher, David Marks, C. Sebastian
Massey, Brad McWilliams, David Mendleson, Jacob Metallo,
Gregg Mixdorf, Scott Mullinnix, Sean Murphy, Robin Morren,
Andrew "Metal" Navaro, Kelly Olnstead, Hershey Ordman,
Tony Plucido, Thaadd Powell, Evan Pritchard, Rhys Pritchard,
Danny Procell, Adam Raymond, Ruth Reimer, Martijn
Riphagen, Carloe Roberts, Paul Roberts, Zo Robinson, Matt
Schaning, Brian Schomburg, Pjotr Slump, Channing Smith,
Arjan Snippe, Erik Snippe, WiL Springer, Jason Steinhurst,
Charlie Stephenson, James Stephenson, Jeremy Stomberg,
Aaron Thompson, Phil Thompson, Coner Trouw, Jeff Tidball,
Ren van den Berg, Wilco van de Camp, Remco van der Waal,
Darrell Wyatt, Joseph Young, and Mike Zebrowski
Battlestar Galactica 31
Special Thanks to: Blake Callaway, Steve Coulter, Maril Davis,
Shelli Hill, Jill Jarosz, Klay Kaulbach, Loretta Kraft, William
Lee, Ron Moore, Ann Morteo, Jerry Petry, Ed Prince, Adam
Stotsky, Joy Tashjian, Stacey Ward
We would also like to thank everyone at Sci Fi and NBC
Universal for not only creating the amazing universe of
Battlestar Galactica, but also for giving us the opportunity to
bring all the magic of the series into the world of board gaming.

INDEX:
Abilities, using: page 13
Activating Cylon Ships: pages 22, 24
Activating Vipers: page 25
Adjusting Difficulty: page 28
Attacking: page 24
Boarding Party Track: page 24
Card Clarifications: page 30
Characters: page 1112
Choosing Optimal Characters: page 6
Combat: pages 2227
Component Breakdown: pages 24
Component Limitations: page 28
Component List: page 2
Creating the Loyalty Deck: page 6
Cylon Attack Cards: page 22
Cylon Players: page 1820
Determining if You Are a Cylon: page 19
Damage Tokens: page 25
Destination Cards: page 13
Destiny Deck: page 15
Frequently Overlooked Rules: page 30
Game Board Breakdown: page 8
Game Overview: page 2
Game Turn: page 9
Receive Skills Step: page 9
Movement Step: page 10
Action Step: page 10
Crisis Step: pages 1011
Activate Cylon Ship Step: page 11
Prepare for Jump Step: page 11
Hand Limit: page 15
Installing Resource Dials: page 5
Jumping the Fleet: page 13
Example of: page 14
During Combat: page 25
Kobol Objective Card: page 14
Line of Succession: page 28
Losing Resources: page 11
Loyalty Cards: page 18
Object of the Game: page 6
Human Objective: page 12
Cylon Objective: page 18
Piloting Vipers: page 26
Example of: page 27
Raptors and Risking: page 26
Remove from the Game: page 24
Revealed Cylon Players: pages 1920
Secrecy: page 20
Setup: page 5
Diagram of: page 7
Ship Reference: page 21
Skill Cards: page 15
Skill Checks: page 16
Example of: page 17
On Game Board: page 18
Skill Supervisor: page 16
Sleeper Agent Phase: page 19
Strategy Tips: page 29
Sympathizer: page 19
Title Cards: page 12
Viper Launch Icon: page 24
Battlestar Galactica  USA Cable Entertainment LLC. All
Rights Reserved. Board game mechanics and rules  Fantasy
Flight Publishing. No part of this product may be reproduced
without specific permission. Fantasy Flight Games, and
the FFG logo are trademarks of Fantasy Flight Publishing,
Inc. Fantasy Flight Games is located at 1975 West County
Road B2, Suite 1, Roseville, Minnesota, 55113, USA, and
can be reached by telephone at 651-639-1905.
Visit Us on the Web
www.FantasyFlightGames.com
32 Battlestar Galactica
Quick Reference
Player Turn
1. Receive Skills Step: Draw Skill Cards according to the skill
set on your character sheet. Revealed Cylon players draw
two Skill Cards of any type(s).
2. Movement Step: Move to any location. If moving to
another ship, you must discard one Skill Card.
3. Action Step: Activate your location, or use a card that
costs an action.
4. Crisis Step: The top card of the Crisis deck is resolved.
5. Activate Cylon Ships Step: Cylon ships are activated
according to the Crisis Card.
6. Prepare for Jump Step: If the Crisis Card has the jump
icon on it, advance the marker one space on the Jump
Preparation track. If the marker is at the end of the track,
then jump the fleet.
Important Note: There are no "Activate Cylon Ship" and
"Prepare for Jump" steps during a revealed Cylon player's turn.
Skill Checks
1. Read Card
2. Play Two Cards from Destiny Deck
3. Play Skills
4. Shuffle and Divide Cards
5. Total Strength
6. Determine Result
Jumping the Fleet
1. Remove Ships
2. Choose Destination
3. Follow Instructions on Destination Card
4. Kobol Instructions
5. Reset Jump Preparation Track
Activating a Viper
There are three possible things that a player may do when
activating a viper:
 Launch a viper
 Move a viper
 Attack with a viper
Activating Cylon Ships
Raiders: Will take one of the following actions (topmost).
1. Attack a viper in its area (unmanned if able).
2. Destroy a civilian ship in its area (current player's choice).
3. Move towards nearest civilian ship (if tied, move
clockwise).
4. Attack Galactica.
If no Raiders are in play, launch two raiders from each
Basestar.
Heavy Raiders: Never attack and always move towards the
nearest viper launch icon. If activated in a space with a viper
launch icon, their centurions board Galactica (see page 24).
Each time heavy raiders are activated, centurions are also
activated. If there are no heavy raiders in play when a crisis
activates them, instead launch one heavy raider from each
Basestar in play.
Quick Lookup
 Damage Tokens: 25
 Line of Succession (Admiral and President): page 28
 Revealed Cylons: page 19
 Setup: page 5
 Strategy Tips: page 29
Attack Table
UNIT ATTACKED DIE RESULT
38 = Destroyed
78 = Destroyed
57 = Damaged
8 = Destroyed
Automatically Destroyed
(no die roll)
With Raider: 8 = Damaged
With Basestar: 48 = Damaged
With Viper: 8 = Damaged
With Galactica: 58 = Damaged
With Nuke: 12 = Damaged Twice
36 = Destroyed
78 = Destroyed and
destroy 3 raiders in
the same area.

GAME NAME:
Castles of Burgundy

DESIGNED BY:
Stefan Feld

The Loire Valley during the 15th Century. As influential princes, the
players devote their efforts to careful trading and building in order to
lead their estates to prominence.
Two dice set out the action options, but the players always make the final
choices. Whether trading or livestock farming, city building or scientific
research, many different paths lead to the prosperity and prominence of the
players!
The many ways to gain victory points in this building game require careful
thought round after round along with extensive planning ahead. Thanks to
the different estates, the game remains challenging for the players for a long
time, as no two games play out alike.
The winner is the player with the most victory points at the end of the
game.

GAME COMPONENTS:
- 164 six-sided tiles:
- 7x 8 buildings (beige, 16x with black backs)
- 7x 4 animals (light green, 8x with black backs)
- 26x "knowledge" (yellow, 6x with black backs)
- 16 castles (dark green, 2x with black backs)
- 12 mines (grey, 2x with black backs)
- 26 ships (blue, 6x with black backs)
- 42 goods tiles (square, 7 in each of 6 colours)
- 20 "Silverlings" (eight-sided)
- 30 worker tiles (square)
- 12 bonus tiles (square, 1 small and 1 large in each of 6 colours)
- 4 victory point tiles (with 100 / 200 points in each of the 4 player colours)
- 8 playing pieces (2 in each of the 4 player colours)
- 9 dice (2 in each of the 4 player colours plus 1 white one)
- 1 game board
- 6 player boards (double-sided, 4x No. 1, 1 each of Nos. 2-9)
If you are reading these rules for the first time, then we recommend ignoring the bold text in the right-hand column
of each page. These texts form a summary of the rules to assist in quickly re-learning the game, even after not having
played for a longer time.

OVERVIEW:
Players take on the roles of 15th
Century princes in Burgundy
Over the course of 5 phases of play,
players collect the game-deciding
victory points via trading, livestock
farming, city building or scientific
research
The player with the most victory
points at the end is the winner

The unique building game about pastures, goods and dice
The Castles of Burgundy
(Before playing for the first time, carefully punch all the tiles out of the counter sheets.)
Place the Gameboard in the middle of the table. It
shows:
5 phase spaces (A-E)
5 round spaces
6 numbered depots (1-6) each with
four spaces for six-sided tiles and 1 large
goods space
1 central black depot
12 spaces for the bonus tiles
1 turn order track
1 victory point track (0-100)
Place the 20 Silverlings, the 30 worker tiles as well as the white die next to
the game board.
Sort the 164 six-sided tiles according to the colour of their backs and place
them, as separate face-down supplies, next to the game board.
Shuffle the 42 goods tiles (square tiles) face down. Then separate them into
5 face-down piles, each made up of 5 tiles. Place one pile onto each of the 5
phase spaces lettered A through E on the game board. The remaining 17 tiles
remain in a face-down supply for now.
Place the 12 bonus tiles (square) onto the corresponding spaces on the game
board.
Give each player:
- 1 player board, placed with the Number 1 side face up in front of himself
(for boards with the numbers 2 through 9, see the additional information on
page 12);
- 1 castle (= dark green six-sided tile), to be placed face up onto the dark green
middle space (with the die value 6) of his player board;
- 3 random goods tiles from the remaining 17 tiles, to be placed face up onto
the three goods storage spaces in the upper left hand corner of his board: tiles
of the same goods type (= colour) are stored together, different types are stored
separately;
(any remaining goods tiles are not used in the game and are returned to the box)
- the 2 dice in his colour;
- 1 playing piece in the same colour, to be placed onto the 0/100 space of the
victory point track;
- 1 Silverling, to be placed in the appropriate storage space in the upper left
hand corner of his board, visible to all other players;
- 1 victory point tile (with 100 / 200), to be placed next to his board for
now.

GAME SETUP:
Place the 20 Silverlings, the 30
worker tiles, the 164 six-sided tiles
(sorted according to colour) and the
white die next to the game board
Place 5 piles of 5 face-down goods
tiles onto phase spaces A-E
Place 2 x 6 bonus tiles onto the
corresponding spaces on the game
board
Give each player:
- 1 player board
- 1 "start castle"
- 3 random goods tiles
- 2 same-coloured dice
- 1 playing piece (victory points)
- 1 playing piece (turn order)
- 1 victory point tile
- 1 Silverling
Game Setup
Don't forget
Determine a start player by rolling dice. That player receives one worker tile
which he places onto the appropriate storage space in the lower left hand corner
of his board, visible to all other players. The next player in clockwise direction
receives 2 worker chips, the third player receives 3 and the fourth player
receives 4.
Each player uses their second playing piece to mark the just-determined playing
order on the first space of the turn order track: The start player's piece should be
on top in the tower and the last player's piece should be at the bottom.
Give the start player the white die.
The game lasts for five phases (A through E). Each phase consists of five rounds.
Setup for each phase
At the start of each phase, the following setup is carried out:
- Remove all six-sided tiles remaining on the board and return them to the box
(naturally not required before the first phase).
(Note: Ship, mine and castle tiles can be left in place as they are all the
same! Any remaining goods tiles are also left on the board!)
- Randomly draw new six-sided tiles and place them, face-up, onto the
matching-coloured six-sided spaces in the six numbered depots: In a
2-player game only those spaces marked with 2s (12 spaces), in a 3-player game
only those spaces marked with 2s and 3s (18 spaces), and in a 4-player game all
24 spaces will have tiles placed onto them.
Note: In the three-player game only, there is an exception for the dark green space
in the No. 6 depot: In phases A, C and E a castle is placed onto it as normal, but in
phases B and D a mine (grey) is placed there instead!
Determine a start player and give
each player 1 to 4 worker tiles
depending on play order
Mark turn order on the turn order
track
Give the start player the white die

GAMEPLAY:
At the start of each phase:
- all remaining six-sided tiles are
removed (not in the first phase)
- Goods tiles on the depots' goods
spaces remain
- add new face-up six-sided tiles
from the supply (depending on
number of players)
- place 5 new goods tiles, face-up,
onto the round spaces

- Take the 5 goods tiles for the current phase and place them, face-up, onto the
five square round spaces below the phase spaces.

THE FIVE GAME ROUNDS:
After phase setup, five game rounds follow, each of which is carried out in the
same manner:
First, all players roll their two dice, with the start player also rolling the white
die. Then all players place their dice in front of themselves so that all players
can see them.
Note: Rolling simultaneously allows those players whose turns come later to start
planning their turns ahead of time.
The start player starts. First, he takes the topmost goods tile from the round
spaces and places it onto the goods space of the depot whose number
matches the number rolled on the white die.
With this, the white die's function for this turn is complete; it cannot be
used by the start player to assist him on his own turn (and can never be
adjusted via worker tiles!).
Thereafter, the start player carries his turn out. It is then the turn of the
next player in turn order (moving from right to left on the turn order
track and from top to bottom in a given tower). Once each player has
had a turn, a new round begins, etc.
As 5 goods tiles are added each phase and since one tile is added to a
depot at the start of each round, it is easy to tell which round the current
one is and how long the current phase (and by extension the entire
game) will last.

A PLAYER'S TURN:
... consists of carrying out exactly two actions, one per die. Once a die has
been used, it is placed onto the used die storage space in the upper right hand
corner of the player's board.
Worker tiles: These may be used at any time (a tile, once used, is returned to
the general supply) to adjust a die's result up or down by 1. Changing a die's
result from 1 to 6 or from 6 to 1 is also permitted and also costs one worker
tile. Players may use multiple tiles to change a die's result multiple times.
Example: By paying 2 worker tiles, Anna can turn a 2 into a 6 and
subsequently take a six-sided tile from the No. 6 depot.
All roll simultaneously
Start player places goods tile
according to white die result
Starting with the start player and
then continuing in turn order, each
player uses their dice to carry out
two actions
Each worker tile used can adjust a
die's result by +/- 1 (including from
1 to 6 or vice versa)

THE ACTIONS:
A die is required for each action. The two actions per turn may be carried out in
any combination and order (including carrying the same action out twice).
? Action "Take six-sided tile from the game board"
The player may take one six-sided tile of their choice from the depot
whose number corresponds to the result of the die used to carry out
the action. The chosen tile is placed onto an empty storage space in the bottom
left-hand corner of his board (never directly into his estate!). Should all of
the storage spaces be full, then he must first choose a prior tile to discard (thus
removing it from the game) and subsequently place the new tile onto the newlyemptied
space (players should try to minimize how often they have to discard
tiles).
Action "Add six-sided tile to your estate"
The player may take one six-sided tile of his choice from the storage
area in the lower left-hand corner of his board and add it to his
estate. The die chosen to carry out this action indicates which corresponding
empty space he may place the tile onto. All newly-placed tiles must always lie
directly adjacent to at least one previously-placed tile. A tile's colour must always
match the colour of the space it is being placed onto.
The first tile can thus only ever be placed onto one of the six spaces surrounding the
start castle'.
Depending on what type of tile was placed, the following occurs immediately
afterwards:
"Knowledge" (yellow): There are 26 different yellow tiles whose functions are
described in more detail on pages 10 and 11.
Ship (blue): Whenever a player adds a ship tile to his estate (which can occur up
to 6 times), then two things happen immediately:
1. The player takes all of the goods tiles on any one depot's goods space and
adds them to the goods storage in the upper left hand corner of his board.
Important: the chosen depot is completely separate and independent of the die
result that was used to place the ship!
Each player may collect up to three different types of goods (= colours) in his
goods storage. Tiles of the same colour are always piled on top of each other, different
coloured tiles are placed next to each other. If, because of this restriction,
a player cannot store all of the goods tiles present in the chosen
depot, then he simply leaves behind any goods he cannot store.
Example: Carla has added a ship to her estate and subsequently
takes goods tiles from the goods space shown: the turquoise one
(which she adds to her other turquoise good) as well as another one
(pink or brown) which she will add to her still-empty goods storage
space
2. The player moves his playing piece on the turn order track one space to the
right. Should this space be occupied, then he places his piece on top of the other
pieces. Should this result in him being start player for the next round then he
also receives the white die.
? Take six-sided tile from the game
board
Die indicates which depot to take
from; place the tile onto an empty
storage space in the bottom left
hand corner of the board
? Add six-sided tile to your estate
Die indicates which empty space
to place the tile onto; tile must be
adjacent to previously-placed tile(s)
and match the space's colour
"Knowledge" (yellow):
see pages 10 + 11
Ships (blue):
1.) Player takes all
goods tiles from the
depot of his choice and
adds them to his goods
storage
2.) Player moves one space to the
right on the turn order track
Animal (= a region of connected light green spaces): Whenever a player adds
an animal tile to his estate (which can occur up to 6 times), then he immediately
receives victory points (and moves his playing piece on the victory point
track forward). Each tile has between 2 and 4 animals on it and the player
receives the corresponding number of victory points for them.
Should the player already have animals of the same type in the pasture (= a
region of connected light green spaces) that the new tile is being added to, then
he scores all tiles with the same animal type again in addition to the newlyplaced
tile (see example below).
Important: The animal tiles must be part of the same pasture but do not need
to be immediately adjacent to the newly-placed animal tile.
Tiles with the same animal on them on other pastures are
not scored.
Castle (dark green): Whenever a player adds a castle tile to his estate (which
can occur up to 3 times), then he immediately carries out an additional action
of his choice as if he had an extra die with any result he wishes at his disposal.
He could, for example, immediately add another six-sided tile to his estate, or ...
Mine (grey): These tiles are (with the exception of a few of the yellow tiles) the
only ones without an immediate effect when they are placed (which can occur
up to 3 times). Instead, at the end of each phase, the player receives 1 Silverling
from the supply for each mine in his estate.
Building (beige): Whenever a
player adds a building tile to his
estate (which can occur up to 12
times), then he immediately gets to
make a single use of that building's
advantage.
Important: Each of the 8 building
types may only occur once per
city (= a region of connected beige
spaces). Depending on the estate,
there may be between 2 and 6 cities
of different sizes (1 to 8 spaces).
Estate No. 1, for example, has 4 cities: one 1-size, one 5-size and two 3-size.
Each building provides an advantage immediately after having been built.
These are also shown symbolically at left on the player boards.
Animals (lt. green):
Provide victory points
depending on how
many animals are
shown on the tile
When an existing pasture is expanded,
then pre-existing animals are
scored again
Castles (dk. green):
Allow an immediate
additional action
Mines (grey):
Provide 1 Silverling
income each at the end
of each phase
Buildings (beige):
Have various uses
depending on building
type
No identical
buildings in a
city!
Example: Benno adds the topmost 4-cow tile to his
estate. He receives 4 + 3 = 7 victory points for it.
Should he add another 4-cow tile to this pasture later
on, then he would receive 4 + 4 + 3 = 11 victory points
for it.
H77 h
The buildings
Warehouse
When a player adds a warehouse to his estate, he may immediately (without
having to use a die!) sell one goods type of his choice out of his goods storage,
exactly as if he had chosen the Sell goods' action (see page 9).
Carpenter's Workshop
When a player adds a carpenter's workshop to his estate, he may immediately
take one beige-coloured building tile of his choice from any numbered depot
(not from the black depot!) and place it onto an empty storage space in the bottom
left-hand corner of his board.
Church
When a player adds a church to his estate, he may immediately take one mine
(grey), "knowledge" (yellow) or castle (dark green) tile of his choice from any
numbered depot (not from the black depot!) and place it onto an empty storage
space in the bottom left-hand corner of his board.
Market
When a player adds a market to his estate, he may immediately take one ship
(blue) or animal (light green) tile of his choice from any numbered depot (not
from the black depot!) and place it onto an empty storage space in the bottom
left-hand corner of his board.
Boarding House
When a player adds a boarding house to his estate, he immediately takes 4
worker tiles from the general supply and adds them to his own.
Bank
When a player adds a bank to his estate, he immediately takes 2 Silverlings from
the general supply and adds them to his own.
City Hall
When a player adds a city hall to his estate, he may immediately add a second
six-sided tile of his choice to his estate from one of his three storage spaces,
regardless of colour (and including all of its effects!).
Watchtower
When a player adds a watchtower to his estate, he immediately moves his playing
piece on the victory point track forward by 4 spaces.
Warehouse:
Player sells the goods
type of his choice
Carpenter's Workshop
Player takes the
building tile of his
choice from the game
board
Boarding House:
Player takes 4 worker
tiles
Bank
Player takes 2 Silverlings
City Hall:
Player adds an additional
six-sided tile of his
choice to his estate
Watchtower:
Player receives 4 victory
points
Church:
Player takes the mine,
"knowledge" or castle
tile of his choice from
the game board
Market:
Player takes the animal
or ship tile of his choice
from the game board
Fundamentally, when placing all buildings:
Their additional advantages are activated' via their placement, a die result (=
action) is not required!
Should a player not be able to make use of a building's advantage (because,
for example, there aren't any more blue or light green tiles left in the numbered
depots after having placed a market), then the building may still be added
(although the advantage is lost in this case).
The supply of worker tiles and Silverlings is not intended to be limited. In the
rare case that the supply is exhausted, please substitute other materials.
Additional rules for placing six-sided tiles:
 Whenever a player takes a six-sided tile from the game board, he must always
first place it onto a storage space in the lower left-hand corner of his board.
This is still the case even if he uses his second action to immediately add it to
his estate.
Six-sided tiles, once added to an estate, may never be moved or removed.
As soon as a coloured region  regardless of its size  is completely
covered with tiles, then this region is considered to be complete and
scores victory points in two different ways:
1. Depending on its size (1 to 8 spaces), the completed region
scores between 1 and 36 victory points which are immediately
scored on the victory point track.
2. Additionally, the region  depending on the phase  scores
between 10 and 2 victory points: The empty phase
space (A-E, in the upper right of the game board)
for the current phase indicates how many additional
victory points each completed region (regardless of
its size!) is worth: between 10 in the first phase (A) and 2 in the last phase (E).
 The first player who manages to cover all spaces of one colour in his entire
estate with tiles (by placing his third mine, for example, or his sixth animal tile)
immediately takes the corresponding large bonus tile from the game board. He
immediately scores victory points depending on the
number of players (5 victory points with 2 players, 6
victory points with 3 players or 7 victory points with
4 players).
The second player to finish covering up this same
colour takes the small bonus tile and the corresponding
2 to 4 victory points. Third and fourth place receive nothing.
Note: As soon as a player reaches or exceeds 100 victory points on the victory
point track, then he places his victory point tile onto his board with the 100
side up. The tile should be placed in the upper right
hand corner, next to the used die storage.
When a player reaches 200 victory
points, then he flips his tile
over
Building advantages never need a
die result for activation
Never add tiles directly to an estate
from the game board
Tiles added to an estate remain
there until the end of the game
As soon as a district is completely
covered with tiles, it scores victory
points in two different ways:
1.) Depending on its size (1-8
spaces): 1-36 victory points
2.) Depending on the phase (A-E):
10-2 victory points
The first player to cover up all
spaces of one colour in his estate
receives the corresponding large
bonus tile and its associated victory
points (2-4 players: 5-7 VP)
The second player to accomplish
this receives the small bonus tile and
its associated victory points
(2-4 players: 2-4 VP)

Action "Sell goods":
A player may choose to sell all goods of one type from his goods storage.
The die chosen to carry out this action indicates which goods type (=
colour) may be sold. All corresponding goods tiles in the player's goods storage are
piled, face-down, onto the goods storage space on the player's board intended for
this purpose. For doing this, the player receives:
- exactly one Silverling from the supply, regardless of how many tiles he just sold (=
turned face-down), as well as
- 2, 3 or 4 victory points per tile (depending on the number of players).
Note: A player must always sell all tiles of a type when choosing the "Sell Goods"
action, even if he would like to keep some in reserve.
Action "Take worker tiles":
Finally, a player may choose to use any die result to take 2 worker
tiles from the general supply. In this case, the die result itself is
meaningless.
The central black depot:
In addition to his two dice actions, each player may, once per turn, choose to
buy one of the six-sided tiles from the central black depot. He may do this at any
point during his turn: before, between or after the dice actions.
To accomplish this, the player must return 2 Silverlings to the general
supply and subsequently place the newly-purchased six-sided tile, as
with any tile from the game board, onto an empty storage space in
the lower left-hand corner of his board.
End of a phase:
A phase ends after five rounds. Players with mines now receive the corresponding
number of Silverlings. Some of the yellow "knowledge" tiles may also have
an effect. The next phase then begins.
The game ends after the fifth phase has been played through to completion. Final
scoring follows, during which players receive victory points for the following:
- each unsold goods tile: 1 victory point
- each remaining Silverling: 1 victory point
- every two worker tiles: 1 victory point
- each VP-bearing yellow tile (see pages 10 and 11).
(Note: Six-sided tiles remaining on the storage spaces of a player's board are
not scored!)
The player who is the farthest along on the victory point track is the winner. In
the case of a tie, the winning player is the tied player with the fewest empty estate
spaces. Should there still be a tie, then the winning player is the tied player who
went later in turn order.
Sell Goods:
Die result indicates goods type: all
goods of this type must be sold
(= turned over):
 + 1 Silverling per sale
 + 2-4 VP per tile
(with 2-4 players)
Take Worker Tiles
Regardless of die result, the player
takes 2 worker tiles from the general
supply
Once per turn, each player may pay
2 Silverlings to buy one tile of their
choice from the black depot
A phase ends after 5 rounds: All
players with mines receive new
Silverlings (and note any "knowledge"
tiles!)
GAME END:
The game ends at the end of the 5th
phase (= 25 rounds/ 50 dice actions)
The following are scored:
 remaining goods tiles: 1 VP
 per Silverling: 1 VP
 per 2 worker tiles: 1 VP
 yellow tiles: X VP
The player with the most victory
points is the winner

The game includes 26 different yellow tiles. Many have effects that take place
immediately after placement, in that they change certain rules. Others only
come into play during final scoring.
1) The player who adds this tile to his estate may ignore the rule that only one
building of each type is allowed in each city. He may thus add as many buildings
as he likes, without restriction, to his cities.
2) The player who adds this tile to his estate receives one worker tile from the
general supply in addition to the usual Silverling for each of his mines at the end
of each phase.
3) The player who adds this tile to his estate receives 2 Silverlings from the
general supply instead of 1 each time he sells goods (either via dice action or by
adding a warehouse to his estate).
4) The player who adds this tile to his estate receives one worker tile from the
general supply in addition to the usual Silverling each time he sells goods (either
via dice action or by adding a warehouse to his estate).
5) The player who adds this tile to his estate may, when adding a ship to his
estate, choose to take goods tiles not from one but from two neighbouring goods
spaces and add them to his goods storage.
6) The player who adds this tile to his estate may buy not only from the central
black depot but also from the other six depots (i.e. from all seven). That player
may still only make one purchase per turn.
7) The player who adds this tile to his estate receives 1 victory point more for
each animal tile (i.e. not for each individual animal!) that scores points when a
new animal tile is added.
Example: Benno adds a 3 sheep tile to a pasture that already has a 4 sheep
tile. He scores (3+1) + (4+1) = 9 victory points. Should he later add a 2 pig
tile to this pasture, then it would score 3 victory points.
8) The player who adds this tile to his estate may adjust a die result by up to +/-
2 per worker tile that he pays.
Example: To make a 3 out of a 6, Carla would now only need 2 worker
tiles.
9) The player who adds this tile to his estate may adjust all die results being
used to place buildings (beige tiles) by +/- 1, just as if he had used a worker tile
for them.
10) The player who adds this tile to his estate may adjust all die results being
used to place ships or animals (blue or light green tiles) by +/- 1, just as if he had
used a worker tile for them.
The Yellow Tiles
H1111 h
11) The player who adds this tile to his estate may adjust all die results being
used to place castles, mines or "knowledge" (dark green, grey or yellow tiles)
by +/- 1, just as if he had used a worker tile for them.
12) The player who adds this tile to his estate may adjust any die results being
used to take new six-sided tiles from the game board by +/- 1, just as if he had
used a worker tile for them.
13) The player who adds this tile to his estate receives one Silverling in addition
to the usual 2 worker tiles each time he chooses the "Take worker tiles"
dice action.
Note: This tile has no effect when adding a boarding house.
14) The player who adds this tile to his estate receives 4 (instead of the usual
2) worker tiles each time he chooses the "Take worker tiles" dice action.
15) The player who adds this tile to his estate receives 3 victory points at the
end of the game for each goods type that he has sold at least one goods tile of.
Unsold goods are ignored. Note: Players may look at their sold goods tiles at any
time.
Example: Dario has sold the following goods tiles: 4x red, 3x violet, 3x pink
and 1x orange. He receives 4 types x 3 victory points = 12 VP.
16-23) The players who add these tiles (Nos. 16-23) to their estates receive 4
victory points at the end of the game for each corresponding building that has
been added to their estates.
Example: Benno has yellow tiles 17 (watchtowers) and 22 (banks) in his estate
at the end of the game, along with 2 watchtowers and 4 banks. He receives
(2 x 4) + (4 x 4) = 24 victory points for them.
24) The player who adds this tile to his estate receives 4 victory points at the
end of the game for each animal type that has been added to his estate.
Example: Anna has 1 cow, 1 chicken and 3 sheep tiles at the end of the
game. She receives 3 types x 4 victory points = 12 VP.
25) The player who adds this tile to his estate receives 1 victory point at the
end of the game for each sold goods tile. Unsold goods are ignored.
Should Dario have also owned this tile, then he would have received 11
VP for it (see example under tile 15 above).
26) The player who adds this tile to his estate receives 2 victory points at the
end of the game for each bonus tile he claimed, regardless whether they are
large or small.

VARIANTS:
Those who know the game well
... can make the following changes during Game Setup: After all typical
game setup is complete and players have determined the player order, each
player receives a random player board. Players are free to choose which side
(front or back) of the board they wish to use, as well as which (dark green)
space they will place their starting castle on.
Players should agree ahead of time whether these decisions will be made openly
(one after the other in turn order) or secretly (all players simultaneously).
Author and publisher thank the many playtesters for their
engagement and suggestions, in particular:
Frieder Benzing, Willi Brodt, Susanne Feld, Jonathan Feld, Benjamin Fleck, Thomas
Koslowski, Amos Krmer, Denis Leonhard, Roland Lurk, Michael Schmitt, Aiko
Schuhmann, Marius Stein, Christoph Toussaint, Roland Wilke, Andreas Zimmermann
as well as game groups in Bacharach Bacharach, Bdefeld, Gengenbach,
Grassau, Mnchen, Offenburg, Reutte and Siegsdorf
Translations by Patrick Korner
Should you have criticisms, questions or suggestions about this
game, please contact us:
alea
Postfach 1150
83233 Bernau am Chiemsee
Fon: 08051 - 970720
Fax: 08051 - 970722
E-Mail: info@aleaspiele.de
Please visit also our website:
www.aleaspiele.de
 2010 Stefan Feld
 2011 Ravensburger Spieleverlag
228846

GAME NAME:
Sid Meier's Civilization: The Board Game

OVERVIEW:
"The future belongs to those who believe in the beauty of their
dreams."
Eleanor Roosevelt

Sid Meier's Civilization: The Board Game is a game for two to
four players, with four players being recommended. Each player
takes charge of a different civilization and attempts to lead their
people to greatness.
Starting with a civilization composed of a single, humble
city lacking even the most rudimentary of inventions, each
player tries to advance their people by building new cities and
improving them, researching new technologies, increasing their
civilization's culture, and harvesting valuable resources.
As the players create new cities and explore the world around
them, they come into contact with smaller civilizations,
some peaceful, some warlike. Players can absorb these minor
civilizations into their own, garnering rewards for doing so.
Ultimately, however, the players' most difficult challenge is
facing each other, as one ascendant civilization collides with
another. Players may wage war on the battlefield, broker sly
deals in the shadows, or race to be the first to build the majestic
wonders in order to become the dominant civilization on Earth.

THE OBJECT OF THE GAME:
"Let us have faith that right makes might, and in that faith, let
us, to the end, dare to do our duty as we understand it."
Abraham Lincoln
Each player can win Sid Meier's Civilization: The Board Game
in one of four ways.
A culture victory is achieved by devoting cities to the arts and
spending the culture points gained as a result to advance up the
culture track to its end. The culture track is described in more
detail on pages 1718.
A tech victory is accomplished by researching the Space Flight
tech. Doing so requires the player to build up their tech pyramid
high enough to allow them to research a level 5 tech. The tech
pyramid is described in more detail on pages 11 and 2122.
An economic victory is completed by accumulating 15 coins.
Coins are a measure of economic power, and gaining them
makes a civilization more efficient. Coins and the means to
acquire them are described in more detail on page 26.
Finally, a military victory is achieved by conquering one other
player's capital. Combat and conquering cities are described in
more detail on pages 2326.
A more detailed explanation of how to win the game can be
found in "Winning the Game" on pages 2223.
...And finally there evolved a species known as man.
And there appeared the first faint glimmers of intelligence.
The fruits of intelligence were many:
Fire, tools, and weapons,
The hunt, farming, and the sharing of food,
The family, the village, and the tribe.
Now it required but one more ingredient:
A great leader to unite the quarreling tribes,
To harness the power of the land,
To build a legacy that would stand the test of time:
The civilization.

COMPONENTS:
The following sections list and describe the physical components
of Sid Meier's Civilization: The Board Game.
- This Rulebook
- Market Board
- 6 Civilization Sheets
- 6 Trade Dials
- 6 Economy Dials
- 6 Plastic Connectors (for the trade and economy dials)
- 6 Home Map Tiles (1 for each civilization)
- 14 Neutral Map Tiles
- 12 City Markers (3 per player)
- 24 Plastic Army Figures (6 per player)
- 8 Plastic Scout Figures (2 per player)
- 1 Plastic White Russian Army Figure
- 55 Square Combat Cards, including:
- 15 Artillery Unit Cards
- 15 Infantry Unit Cards
- 15 Mounted Unit Cards
- 8 Aircraft Unit Cards
- 2 Combat Bonus Cards

224 Small Cards, including:
- 4 Setup Cards (1 per player)
- 16 Government Cards (4 per player)
- 144 Tech Cards (36 per player)
- 1 Space Flight Tech Card
- 47 Culture Event Cards
- 12 Wonder Cards
- 12 Wonder Markers (4 Ancient, 4 Medieval, 4 Modern)
- 6 Culture Level Markers (1 per civilization)
- 18 Great Person Markers
- 28 Military Tech Markers (7 per player)
- 49 Building Markers, including:
- 10 Harbor Markers
- 6 Trading Post Markers
- 6 Workshop/Iron Mine Markers
- 6 Library/University Markers
- 6 Granary/Aqueduct Markers
- 5 Market/Bank Markers
- 5 Temple/Cathedral Markers
- 5 Barracks/Academy Markers

- 20 Hut Markers
- 10 Village Markers
- 12 Disaster Markers
- 1 First Player Marker
- 16 Market Resource Tokens
- 90 Culture Tokens
- 28 Wound Tokens
- 75 Coin Tokens
- 4 Reference Sheets (1 per player)

Component Descriptions:
This section identifies each component of Sid Meier's
Civilization: The Board Game.
Market Board
The market board consists of two main areas  the market and
the culture area. The market, at the top, is where wonders,
buildings, and units are placed for the players to purchase. The
culture area, at the bottom, contains the culture track  which
tracks the players' progress towards a culture victory  and
provides a place to keep the culture event cards during play.
Civilization Sheets
Each player receives a civilization sheet that explains the
special properties of their civilization. See "Civilization Sheet
Breakdown" on page 7 for further details.
Trade Dial, Economy Dial,
and Plastic Connecto rs
The trade and economy dials are attached to each player's
civilization sheet using the plastic connectors and are used to
track their civilization's current trade and number of coins.
Map Tiles
These tiles include both home and neutral map tiles, and are used
to construct the map board. Each map tile is composed of 16
squares of terrain. See the "Map Tile and Icon Breakdown" on
page 7 for further details.
Home Map Tiles
Each of these six map tiles belongs to a specific civilization, as
indicated by the picture of the civilization's leader on the back of
its home tile. At the start of the game, each player's home tile is
where their civilization begins on the map board.
Neutral Map Tiles
These 14 map tiles do not belong to any specific civilization.
Instead, they are shuffled up and laid out facedown at random to
construct the rest of the map board during setup.
City Markers
Cities are indicated on the map by city markers. Each player
receives three city markers  one capital and two normal cities.
City markers have a walled version on their back.
Capital City
Walled Capital Walled City
Plastic Army and Scout Figures
These plastic figures represent the players' armies and scouts.
The plastic flags are armies and represent the players' military
forces. The plastic wagons are scouts and represent the players'
non-military forces.
Note: The white army figure is for the Russian player's use, as
explained in "Player Setup" on pages 1011.
Army Figures Scout Figures
Unit Cards
Each unit card represents either an artillery, infantry, mounted,
or aircraft unit. Each unit card (except for aircraft) has four
different versions of the unit depicted around its four edges.
Each player uses the most powerful version of the unit that
their civilization's tech pyramid allows. Unit cards are more
completely described on page 23.
Combat Bonus Cards
These cards are used at the start of combat to record any strength
advantages one player has over the other in the battle.
Setup Cards
The setup cards list all of the items that the players start the
game with. On the other side of these cards, all items that can be
built at the start of the game are shown, as well as the starting
values of any important civilization traits, such as travel speed.
Government Cards
These cards are used to indicate what type of government a
player's civilization is currently ruled by. Each card is doublesided,
with a different type of government on each side. A
player's civilization sheet shows what type of government
their civilization begins the game with. For further details on
governments, see page 14.
Tech Cards
Tech cards represent various technologies or discoveries that a
civilization can research to give them access to buildings, units,
governments, or other abilities. Each player receives an identical
deck of tech cards with which to track their civilization's
scientific progress. For a complete description of tech cards and
the tech pyramid, see pages 11 and 2122.
Note: Space Flight is a special level 5 tech card that ends the
game when researched. As such, only one copy of it is included
with the game.
Culture Event Cards
Culture event cards are divided into three decks  ancient
(one column), medieval (two columns), and modern (three columns).
These cards are gained as players move up the culture track.
Culture events have a variety of effects designed to either help
the player who plays the culture event or to hurt that player's
opponents. Culture events are more fully described on page 18.
Wonder Cards and Markers
Wonders are awe-inspiring monuments or accomplishments that
secure a civilization's place in human history. Each wonder has
a card and a marker corresponding to it. The card explains the
wonder's cost and ability, while the marker indicates its position
on the map. For more information on wonders, see page 17.
Wonder Cards Wonder Markers
Culture Level Markers
These markers are used to record the player's progress on the
culture track. For more information, see "B. Devote to the Arts"
on page 17.
Great Person Markers
Great person markers represent famous or important people who
appear in a civilization. There are six different kinds of great
people, as listed below:
Artist Builder General
Humanitarian Industrialist Scientist
Great people provide useful resources to the city they are placed in
and are usually gained by a civilization's advancing up the culture
track. For further information on great people, see page 18.
Military Tech Markers
These markers are used to track the players' military technology.
For more information, see "Upgrading Units" on page 21.
Building Markers
Building markers are used to indicate city improvements that
a player has built in a city's outskirts. Typically, these markers
increase the amount of trade, production, or culture a city
produces each turn, but they may indicate other bonuses as well.
For a complete description of building markers, see pages 1617.
Hut and Village Markers
As players explore the map, they may encounter minor
civilizations. A hut indicates a peaceful civilization that may be
easily absorbed, while a village indicates a warlike civilization
that must be subjugated through force of arms. Huts and villages
are fully described on page 20.
Hut Village
Disaster Markers
The disaster markers (which show grassland on one side and
desert on the other) are used to mark the effects of Deforestation
and Drought culture event cards. Culture events are more fully
explained on page 18.
First Player Marker
The first player marker indicates which player
goes first in each phase on a given turn.
Market Resource Tokens
Certain special resources appear on the map and may be harvested
by the players and later used to activate resource abilities on their
tech cards. The four main resources available are:
Wheat Silk Incense Iron
In addition, there are two resources that cannot be harvested
from the map:
Spy Uranium
Spies and uranium are never found on the map for harvesting,
but spies can be gained from huts and villages. Uranium, on the
other hand, can only be found in villages  and only very rarely
at that.
Culture Tokens
These tokens are used by players to keep track
of unspent culture until it is spent to advance
their culture level markers up the culture track.
Culture is normally gained by devoting a city to the
arts, as described on page 17.
Wound Tokens
Wound tokens are used to keep track of damage
inflicted to units during battle. Combat is described
in detail on pages 2326.
Coin Tokens
Coin tokens are used to record coins gained from
certain tech cards such as Democracy. After a coin
is gained through the use of a tech, a coin token is
placed on that tech and the player's economy dial
is advanced by one. For full details on coins, see
page 26.
Reference Sheets
The reference sheets contain a turn sequence breakdown on one
side and a summary of item costs and some other important rules
on the other.
Map Tile and Icon Breakdown
Civilization Sheet Breakdown
Each civilization sheet contains the
civilization's name (A), leader (B), special
abilities (C), starting government (D), and
starting tech (E). Every civilization sheet also
has two dials (F). A civilization's current trade
( @ ) is tracked on the large outer dial, while
the civilization's total coins ( $ ) are tracked on
the small inner dial.

Mountain Forest Grassland Desert Water
There are five types of terrain that can be found on map tiles:
There are also natural wonders, which are squares that provide
culture ( # ) in addition to their terrain type's normal icons.
Mountain Forest Grassland Desert Water
Each map tile is composed of 16 squares of terrain. Each square
may contain one or more icons and/or resources that the square
can provide to players.
Hut
(Peaceful)
Village
(Aggressive)
Recommended
Capital Space for
Beginners
Other important symbols that may appear on the map include:
The icons a square might contain include:
Trade Production Culture Coin
Wheat Silk Incense Iron
Resources that a square might contain include:
Map Tile
Entry Side

PREPAING FOR THE FIRST GAME:
"The past is but the beginning of a beginning, and all that is or
has been is but the twilight of the dawn."
H. G. Wells
Before playing Sid Meier's Civilization: The Board Game for
the first time, carefully punch out the cardboard components,
making sure to keep them away from small children and
animals.
Then, take the civilization sheets, trade dials, economy dials, and
plastic connectors and assemble them as shown below.
For the first game, it is recommended that new players play a
simplified learning game. Simply return Egypt, Rome, and the
wonders (both cards and markers) to the box, and then ignore
the rules for wonders for that game. Otherwise, play as normal
until a player builds their third city. At that point, end the game
and (if time allows and the players so desire) start a new game
after adding Egypt, Rome, and the wonders back in. The point of
the learning game is to familiarize the players with the various
elements of the game, so there are no winners or losers in it.

GAME SETUP:
This section explains the general setup of the game.
1. Choo se Civilizations and Colors
Each player draws a civilization sheet at random and places it
faceup in front of them. Optionally, players may select their
civilizations if all players agree. Return any unused civilization
sheets to the box. Each player then chooses a player color.
2. Distribute Player Components
Each player takes the following in their player color:
Eight plastic fi  gures (6 armies and 2 scouts)
 Three city markers (1 capital and 2 cities)
 Four military tech markers
 One deck of 36 tech cards
Players also receive:
 One reference sheet
 One setup card
 One deck of government cards (4 cards)
3. Set Up Market Board
Place the market board at one end of the table, as shown in the
diagram on page 9. On it, place the following:
A. Unit Cards
Sort the unit cards by type  artillery, infantry, mounted, and
aircraft. Then, shuffle each deck, and place it on the marked space.
Finally, give each player one artillery, one infantry, and one
mounted unit. These units are placed facedown in a single pile
near the player and are known as the player's standing forces.
B. Military Tech Markers
Each player takes their lower ranked (one stripe on one side, two
stripes on the other) military tech markers for artillery, infantry,
and mounted units and places them in the area below the
appropriate unit deck so that the sides with one stripe are faceup.
They each then take their aircraft military marker and place
it below the aircraft unit deck so that the side with the star is
facedown. The other military tech markers are set aside for now.
C. Building Markers
Sort the building markers by type and place them on their
indicated spaces. Note that a building with an arrow next to its
name is an upgraded building and is found on the back of the
un-upgraded building tile.
D. Wonder Cards (not used in the learning game)
Build the wonder deck by shuffling the ancient, medieval, and
modern wonders separately. Place the modern wonders facedown
on the top space of the wonder market. Then place the medieval
wonders (also facedown) on top of them. Finally, place the ancient
wonders faceup in the four market spaces below the wonder deck.
Exception: If Egypt is playing, Egypt receives one of the ancient
wonders at random before the remainder are placed in the
market. One of the medieval wonders is then drawn and placed
in the market to replace the missing ancient wonder.
8
Many of the abilities and cards in this
game allow the players to break the rules
in a variety of ways. In the event that an
ability or card conflicts with these rules,
the ability or card takes priority.
The Golden Rule
Setup Diagram
(Numbers refer to General Setup steps.)
Map Setup by Number of Players
(Arrows indicate tile orientation.)
E. Wonder Markers (not used in the learning game)
Look at the four faceup wonder cards in the market spaces below
the wonder deck, find the matching wonder marker for each, and
place the marker in the space next to its wonder card.
F. Culture Event Cards
Separate the culture event cards into ancient (one column),
medieval (two columns), and modern (three columns) decks.
Shuffle each deck separately and place it facedown on its indicated
space below the culture track at the bottom of the market board.
G. Culture Level Markers
Each player takes the culture level marker showing their leader
and places it on the start space of the culture track.
4. Set Up Market Resources
Place one of each market resource token per player near the market
board, returning any extras to the box. For instance, if there are
three players, three of each market resource token are used and the
remaining market resource tokens are returned to the box.
5. Build Map
Each player takes their home map tile (the map tile with their
civilization's leader on the back) and places it faceup in front of
them, oriented as indicated in the setup diagram for the proper
number of players. Unused home tiles are returned to the box.
Then, one player shuffles the neutral map tiles and deals them
out facedown to form the rest of the map, again as indicated by
the diagram on page 4. Return any unused neutral map tiles to
the box without looking at them.
6. Shuffle Rando m Markers
Place the great people markers facedown near the market board
and mix them up, keeping them facedown. Repeat this process
for the hut markers and then the village markers.
7. Form Token Banks
Place the culture, wound, and coin tokens next to the market
board in three separate stockpiles.
8. Place Special Cards and Markers
Place the combat bonus cards and the Space Flight tech card
faceup near the market board along with the disaster markers.
9. Select First Player
Choose a player to go first. Either choose the player who can
trace their family history back the farthest, or select at random.
Give the chosen player the first player marker. Finally, each
player individually sets up their civilization by taking the steps
in the next section.

PLAYER SETUP:
After general setup is complete, each player does the following:
1. Place Capital
Each player chooses one of the four center squares on their
home map tile to place their capital on. For a player's first
game, they are advised to use the square with the starting arrow
(highlighted in red below) on it.
The player places their capital city marker on the selected
square, unwalled side up. That square is known as the city
center, while the eight squares adjacent to it (the squares with
arrows pointing to them on the diagram below) are known as the
city outskirts.
10
2. Gain Civilization Bonuses
Each player looks at their civilization sheet to see what, if
anything, they receive as a bonus at the start of the game. The
bonuses are summarized below:
America
America gains a random great person. America places the great
person in the outskirts of their capital at the end of setup. (For a
player's first game, it is recommended that they place the great
person in the grassland square next to their capital).
China
China starts with walls in its capital. China turns their capital
city marker so that the marker's walled side is up instead of its
unwalled side.
Egypt
Egypt receives a random ancient wonder. This wonder should
have already been taken from the market board during general
setup. Its marker must be placed in the outskirts of the player's
capital. (For a player's first game, it is recommended that they
place the wonder marker in the grassland square by their capital.)
Germany
Germany starts with two extra infantry units from the market
board, adding the units to their standing forces.
Rome
Rome begins the game governed by Republic instead of by
Despotism, as described in step 5 of player setup, later on.
Russia
Russia takes the white Russian army figure and adds it to their
figures. When figures are placed on the map in step 3 (below),
Russia places the white army figure on the map as well. In
addition, Russia begins the game governed by Communism
instead of Despotism, as described in step 5 of player setup, later
on.
3. Place Figures
Each player takes one of their army figures and one of their scout
figures and places them (either separately or together) in one (or
two) of the city outskirts squares of their capital. Figures cannot
be placed in water squares at the start of the game.
4. Learn Starting Tech
Each player looks at the bottom of their civilization sheet to
see what tech card they begin with, searches through their tech
deck for the indicated card, and places it faceup in front of them,
leaving plenty of room around it.
Note: The level of a player's starting tech is irrelevant during
setup. The tech is always placed in the bottom row of the player's
tech pyramid. If another player learns that tech through any
means, the tech is still considered to be its normal level. (See
"The Tech Pyramid" sidebar on this page and "Research" on
page 20 for more information about tech cards.)
11
The Tech Pyramid
the pyramid (along with the player's starting tech), level II techs
form the second row, and so on, up to level V. While a player
may learn any number of level I techs, each level II tech a player
researches must be placed above two level I techs, as shown
below. Similarly, each level III tech a player learns must be
placed above two level II techs, etc. For further information, see
"Research" on page 20.
Level I Techs
(And Starting Tech)
Level II Techs
Legal Space
for Level II
Tech
Legal Space
for Level III
Tech
Over the course of the game, each civilization must advance
socially and technologically, or find itself at a disadvantage to
more sophisticated civilizations. These advances are represented
by tech cards.
Tech cards researched by a player are arranged in a pyramid
shape as they are acquired. Level I techs form the bottom row of
5. Set Starting Governments
Each player stacks their government cards so that the Despotism/
Republic card is on top of the cards, with the Despotism side
faceup. They then place the stack of cards on the indicated space
on their civilization sheet.
Exceptions: Rome begins as a Republic, while Russia begins
governed by Communism. They must each place the proper
government card with the appropriate side faceup on top of their
government cards instead of Despotism.
Note: The government cards have different governments on each
side. If a player is having trouble finding their government, they
should check the backs of their government cards!
6. Set Trade Dial
Each player counts all of the trade symbols ( @ ) in the eight
squares of their capital's city outskirts and then sets the trade
dial (the large outer dial) on their civilization sheet to that total.
For example, if a total of three trade symbols are in the outskirts
of a player's capital, the player sets their trade dial to "3."
Note: Players collect trade again on the first turn of the game.
7. Set Economy Dial
Each player sets the economy dial (the small inner dial) on their
civilization sheet to "0."
Note: It is possible for some players to receive a coin from a map
square or great person during setup. If this is the case, the player
sets their economy dial to the number equal to the number of
coins they have, instead.
8. Place Unbuilt Figures
Finally, each player places one city marker, their remaining
five army figures, and their remaining scout figure by their
civilization sheet to indicate that they are ready to be built. The
other city marker is set aside until the player learns the Irrigation
tech, at which point it is added to the available items as well.
Game Turn Overview
Civilization is played over a number of game turns, each of
which is composed of five phases. These phases are performed in
the order listed below. During each phase, starting with the first
player and continuing clockwise around the table, every player
has the opportunity to perform the actions associated with that
phase. The phases of a turn are as follows:
1. Start of Turn
2. Trade
3. City Management
4. Movement
5. Research
1. Start of Turn
During this phase, the first player marker is passed one player
to the left (except on the first turn). Then, the new first player
performs any start of turn actions (usually found on wonders
or culture event cards), builds any new cities (see page 13), and
changes governments if desired (see page 14). After the first
player completes their Start of Turn Phase, the player to the
first player's left begins their Start of Turn Phase. This process
continues until all players have completed their Start of Turn
Phase.
2. Trade
During this phase, each player collects trade from all of their
cities, and then the players may negotiate with each other,
trading a variety of game resources up to and including
promises (see pages 1415). This phase may be simultaneously
performed by every player to save time.
3. City Management
In the City Management Phase, the first player takes one action
with each of their cities. A city may produce an item (such as a
building or unit card), devote itself to the arts to gain culture, or
harvest a resource as its action (see pages 1518). After the first
player completes their City Management Phase, play passes to
the left and the next player completes their City Management
Phase, until all players have done so.
4. Movement
During the Movement Phase, the first player moves each of their
figures (armies and scouts) up to a number of squares equal
to the player's travel speed. A civilization's travel speed starts
at two and is increased by certain tech cards, such as Sailing.
Movement may cause battles to occur and facedown map tiles to
be revealed (see page 19). After the first player completes their
entire Movement Phase, play passes to the left and the next player
completes their Movement Phase, until all players have done so.
5. Research
During the Research Phase, each player may learn one new tech
by spending trade. They then add their newly learned tech to
their tech pyramid (see page 20). Unlike most other phases, this
phase is always performed simultaneously by every player.

GAME TURN:
This section explains each phase of the turn in detail.
1. Start of Turn
During this phase, players can expand their civilizations and
change their civilizations' form of government. The first player
has the first opportunity to perform those actions during the
Start of Turn Phase. After the first player has performed all the
start of turn actions they wish to, play passes to the player's left,
and the next player may then perform all of their desired start of
turn actions, until all players have had a chance to do so.
Building New Cities
"A great city is not to be confounded with a populous one."
Aristotle
To become a dominant civilization, a player's civilization must
expand geographically beyond its isolated, provincial origins.
The Building New Cities action enables a civilization to do so.
This action allows a player to construct a new city, which then
lets them take more city actions each turn.
During the Start of Turn Phase, if a player has fewer built cities
than their maximum number of cities (two normally, three if the
player has researched the Irrigation tech), they may build one
or more new cities on the map, provided that doing so does not
take the player above their maximum number of cities. To build
a new city, the player must first have a scout figure (representing
settlers) in each square that they wish to place a city marker in.
In addition, that square must meet the following requirements:
The square c  annot be a water square.
 There must be eight revealed squares adjacent to the square
(i.e., no cities may be placed on the edge of the map or next to
a facedown map tile).
 The square cannot be adjacent to a hut or village token (once
the tokens are removed from the map, however, the squares
they were in/adjacent to become fair game).
 The square cannot be adjacent to an enemy figure (either
army or scout). Friendly figures may be adjacent, or even in
the same square as the scout.
 The square must be at three squares or more away from
any other city marker, including diagonals (i.e., the city's
outskirts must not overlap any other city's outskirts).
If these requirements are met, the player sacrifices the scout,
removing it from the board and returning it to their civilization
sheet. Then, the player places a city marker on the space,
unwalled side up. As mentioned earlier, this square is called the
city center of the new city, and the eight squares adjacent to it
are now the city outskirts.
Note: The city center never generates anything. Its icons are
effectively erased as long as the city marker remains. Only
squares in a city's outskirts provide icons and resources.
If there are any friendly figures in the square where a city
is being built besides the scout being sacrificed, the player
immediately moves them to an adjacent square that they can
legally end their movement in.
A city starts generating trade and production right away, so it
produces trade during this turn's Trade Phase (see page 14) and
receives an action during the City Management Phase (see pages
1518).
City Placement Example: On the diagram below, the green
squares are the only legal squares a new city can be built in. The
red squares all mark sample illegal city placements. The reason
each red square cannot have a city built in it is listed below.
 A can't have a city built in it because it is a water square.
 B is illegal because it is adjacent to the village token to its
right (but would be legal once the village token is removed
from that square).
 C is adjacent to a facedown map tile.
 D is adjacent to the green enemy army below it.
 E is less than three squares away from the city above it.

Changing Governments
"A great wind is blowing, and that gives you either imagination
or a headache."
Catherine the Great
A civilization's government reflects its character and its overall
goals, and over time, a civilization may pass through many
types of government as its character changes. In this game,
government cards indicate what form of rulership a player's
civilization has. Governments are special cards unlocked
(see page 21) through tech cards that allow a player to focus on
certain strategies, usually to the detriment of other strategies. At
the start of the game, players have only unlocked the Despotism
government and begin with it in play. (Exception: Rome and
Russia each have another government unlocked as well, which
they start the game with as their form of government.)
Once a player unlocks a new form of government during the
Research Phase as the result of learning a new tech, they may
change to that government during the Start of Turn Phase of
the following turn. To do so, they simply look through their
government deck, locate the corresponding government card,
and place it with the appropriate side faceup on top of their
government deck. This change represents the fact that their
civilization has switched over to the new form of government.
However, a player only has one opportunity to change directly to
a new government. If the player wishes to change to a different
government on any turn other than the turn immediately after
unlocking that government, they must first change to the
Anarchy transitional government. This special transitional
government represents the upheaval occurring in the civilization
and prevents the player from taking an action with their capital
that turn. If a player's civilization is in Anarchy, they may
change to any other government they know during the Start of
Turn Phase of the next turn after entering Anarchy.
Note: Any ongoing benefits from a government, such as the
abilities on Republic or the coin on Feudalism, only last while a
player's civilization continues to be ruled by that government.
2. Trade
The following activities may be performed by the players during
the Trade Phase: collecting trade and negotiating and trading.
Players may all perform these actions simultaneously to save
time.
Collecting Trade
During the Trade Phase, each player tallies up all of the trade
symbols ( @ ) in the city outskirts of all of their cities and
then increases the trade dial on their civilization sheet by that
amount (up to a maximum of 27 trade). For example, if a player
has two cities, one with four trade symbols in its outskirts and
the other with eight trade symbols in its outskirts, that player
increases their trade dial by 12 on their civilization sheet. Unlike
production (see page 15), trade may be saved from turn to turn if
not spent.
Note: When increasing or decreasing the trade dial, make sure to
count the spaces marked "I," "II," "III," "IV," and "V." Although
labeled differently from the other values, these spaces must be
counted as usual. So, for instance, a player who gains three trade
while at "3" on their trade dial would advance their dial to the
"I" space rather than the "7."
Scouts and Blockades
Scout figures have the ability to gather any trade symbols in the
square they inhabit each turn. For full details on this, see "Scout
Gathering" on page 26.
A square in a city's outskirts that contains one or more enemy
figures (either scouts or armies) does not produce trade for the
city's owner. For full details on this, see "Blockades" on page 27.
Trade ( @ ) vs. Prod uction ( ! )
Trade Prod uction
Pooled from all of a civilization's cities. Spent from only one city at a time.
Can be saved from turn to turn on the
civilization's trade dial. Cannot be saved. Any production not spent is lost.
May be converted to production (see "Rushing
Production with Trade" on page 15). Cannot be converted to trade.
Trade ( @ ) represents commerce and scientific progress in a civilization. It is primarily spent to research new techs.
Production ( ! ) represents a city's industry. It is used to produce figures, units, buildings, or wonders.
Trade and production are contrasted below.

Negotiating and Trading
"Politics is war without bloodshed, while war is politics with
bloodshed."
Mao Zedong
It is often advantageous for civilizations to trade with each other
and make alliances. Such trades might provide needed help at a
critical moment for a civilization or a steady supply of a resource
a civilization lacks. After trade is collected during the Trade
Phase, players may negotiate and/or trade among themselves.
Trades are fairly open, and may include an exchange of any or all
of the following:
 Non-binding Promises
 Points of Trade
 Unspent Culture Tokens (see page 17)
 Resource Tokens (either from the market or from hut/village
tokens)
 Culture Event Cards (see page 18)
Note: If a player exceeds their culture hand size as a result of a
trade, they must immediately discard down to their hand size.
Items not on the list above may not be given or traded to another
player unless specifically allowed by a card or ability.
3. City Management
"Waste neither time nor money, but make the best use of both.
Without industry and frugality, nothing will do, and with them
everything."
Benjamin Franklin
Managing the industrial capacity of a civilization is a formidable
task, and the City Management Phase is when players do so.
During it, players must balance production, developing their
culture, and gathering resources, or focus on some of them to
the detriment of the others. The first player completes their
City Management Phase first, then play passes to the player on
their left, and so on, until all players have completed their City
Management Phase. The following actions may be performed by
the players during the City Management Phase.
City Actions
During the City Management Phase, each player takes one action
with each of their cities. This action can be used for one and
only one of the following three purposes each turn:
A. Produce a Figure, Unit, Building, or Wonder
B. Devote to the Arts
C. Harvest a Resource
A. Prod uce a Figure, Unit, Building, or Wonder
Cities often turn their industry towards the creation of things
for the common good. When a city is used for production, it can
produce any one item with a production cost equal to or less
than the total number of production symbols ( ! ) contained in
that city's outskirts. The entire production cost for an item must
come from the city producing it. Multiple cities cannot combine
their production together to produce an item. Any excess
production in the city is wasted; it cannot be saved for a future
turn. For example, the city shown below has 5 ! symbols in its
outskirts, so it may use its action to produce one item that costs 5
! or less each turn.
Scouts and Blockades
Scout figures have the ability to gather any production symbols
in the square they inhabit each turn. For full details on this, see
"Scout Gathering" on page 26.
A square in a city's outskirts that contains one or more enemy
figures (either scouts or armies) does not generate production
for the city's owner. For full details on this, see "Blockades" on
page 27.
Rushing Production with Trade
If a city does not have enough production to produce a desired
item, the player may choose to spend some of their trade to make
up the difference. For every 3 points a player reduces their
trade dial by, the player may boost the production in one of
their cities by 1 for a single turn. A player may do this as often
as they like, so long as they can afford the trade to do so.
Producing Figures
At some point in their history, most civilizations are forced to
muster armies, or, at the very least, send explorers and diplomats
out into the world. A player may produce an army or scout figure
with a city's action, assuming they have at least one unbuilt
figure of that type and meet the figure's production cost. When a
figure is produced, the player takes one of the figures from next
to their civilization sheet and places it in the outskirts of the city
that produced it. Figures may not be placed in a water square
unless the player has learned a tech that allows their figures to
end their movement in water (such as Sailing, Steam Power,
or Flight). Figures may be placed in the same square as other
friendly figures, but the total figures in a square cannot exceed
that civilization's stacking limit (see "Moving Groups and
Stacking Limit" on page 19).

Armies
Army figures represent a civilization's military forces and cost
4 ! each. Army figures are the only figures that can fight battles
and explore huts and villages.
Scouts
Scout figures represent a civilization's non-military forces and
cost 6 each. Scouts may be used to build new cities (see page
13) or to gather extra trade, production, or other resources for a
city (see "Scout Gathering," on page 26).
Scouts cannot enter squares containing huts or villages and are
killed immediately any time they are attacked by an army, unless
they have a friendly army escorting them.
Producing Units
War is and always has been one of the central preoccupations of
civilization. To make war, a civilization needs armies, and these
armies are built out of smaller forces, known as units. Unit cards
represent specific units in an army. To produce a unit, a player
checks to make sure that the city's production is high enough to
produce the chosen type of unit, and then the player draws a unit
card at random from the appropriate deck and adds it to their
standing forces pile.
Artillery, infantry, and mounted units are unlocked and able
to be produced with a city's action from the start of the game,
but aircraft units require the player to know the Flight tech to
produce them. If a unit deck is empty, units of that type are not
available to be produced until some are killed and returned to the
deck. If players go through the entire deck of a type of unit and
arrive at units that have been returned faceup to the bottom of
the deck, they must turn the deck over and shuffle it.
To determine the production cost of a unit, the player looks at the
market board to see how advanced their units of that type are.
The more advanced the unit, the more expensive it is.
Rank 1 artillery, infantry, or m  ounted units cost 5 ! each.
 Rank 2 artillery, infantry, or mounted units cost 7 ! each.
 Rank 3 artillery, infantry, or mounted units cost 9 ! each.
 Rank 4 artillery, infantry, or mounted units cost 11 ! each.
 Aircraft units always cost 12 ! each (once unlocked).
Note: Because advanced units are more expensive, it is most cost
effective to produce the units while they are cheaper and then
upgrade them (see page 21).
Producing Buildings
A civilization's buildings do more than simply house its citizens.
They are the sites of a civilization's industry, commerce, and
learning  all of which are invaluable to the civilization's
success. In order to produce a building, the player must first
know a tech that unlocks it. A building's ! cost is indicated
on the tech that unlocks it as well as on the market board. For
example, the Pottery tech unlocks the Granary and indicates that
the Granary's ! cost is 5.
Like units, buildings are limited to the number of components
available. Once all buildings of a certain type have been
produced, no more can be produced until one of the existing
buildings of that type is destroyed.
Once produced, a building must be placed in the outskirts of the
city that produced it. However, buildings are restricted as to what
type of terrain they can be built on. The type of terrain that a
building is restricted to is indicated on the market board and is
listed below. Normally, any number of a given type of building
may be built in a city as long as suitable terrain exists.
Exception: Limited buildings (marked with a star on their
markers) are restricted to one per city. See page 17 for further
details.
Buildings Terrains Allowed
Harbor Water
Trading Post Desert
Workshop/Iron Mine Mountain
Library/University
Granary/Aqueduct Grassland
Market/Bank
Temple/Cathedral
Barracks/Academy
Any Terrain Except Water
(One per City)
Note: Buildings separated by a slash ("/") in their name represent
the basic and upgraded forms of the same building type and are
printed on the front and back of the same markers. For more
information on upgrading buildings, see page 22.
Once a building marker is placed on a square, the icons on the
building completely replace any icons that the square had.
Important Note: A water square with a Harbor placed in it is
still considered to be water for the purposes of movement.
So, if a player builds a Temple in a forest square, that square now
contains two culture ( # ) icons and no production ( ! ) icons,
despite the fact that the forest square previously contained two
production ( ! ) icons.
Not every unit is created equal. Some units are a bit
stronger, while others are a bit weaker. Units range from
1 to 3 strength at rank 1 and increase their strength by 1
per rank from there, up to their maximum at rank 4. The
average strength of a unit at rank 1 is 2.
A Word on Units
Limited Buildings
Some buildings, marked with stars in their upper right corner,
are limited. Although they are less restricted with respect to the
types of terrain they may be placed in, they are more restricted
in another way: a city can only have a total of one limited
building in its outskirts. For example, if a player has already
placed a Market in a city, that player cannot also place a Temple
in that city, since both are limited buildings.
City Walls
Using the Masonry tech, a player may build City Walls around
one or more of their cities. City Walls are treated like any
other building, except that they are considered to be located
in the city's center. To indicate that a city has walls, simply turn
the city marker over so that its walled side is faceup. Only one
City Walls may be built per city.
City Walls are an excellent defensive measure for a player to
build when it appears that one of their cities is in danger of being
attacked. A wall provides +4 to a player's strength total when
defending that city and forces the attacker to play a unit first in
the battle (see pages 2324).
Producing Wonders
Some civilizations construct mighty wonders that survive in
myth and legend long after their creators have died. The Hanging
Gardens are one such wonder. These wonders provide powerful
advantages to the players who build them. Any player may use
a city action to produce one of the wonders that are faceup in
the market. The corresponding wonder card lists the production
cost of the wonder, along with a discounted cost that is available
if the player knows the specific tech listed on the wonder. For
example, the Colossus costs 15 ! normally, but only 10 ! if the
player producing it knows the Metalworking tech.
Note: Remember that cities cannot combine production to
produce an item. The entire cost for the wonder must be paid
by a single city. Converting trade to production, using resource
abilities, and using certain culture event cards can help a player
increase the amount of production a city generates.
Once the wonder has been produced, the player places
the wonder card faceup in front of them and places the
corresponding wonder token in the outskirts of the city that
produced the wonder. After building a wonder, a new wonder is
drawn from the wonder deck and added to the market. Wonders,
like limited buildings, may be placed on any terrain except for
water and are restricted to one per city. A city may contain both
a wonder and one limited building.
Important Note: Wonders are not buildings, and abilities
that affect buildings do not affect wonders unless explicitly
stated.
Obsoleting Wonders
Certain tech cards allow a player to obsolete a wonder, negating
its special ability for the rest of the game. This process is
explained in detail on page 27.
Replacing Buildings and Wonders
A player may choose to replace one of their existing buildings or
wonders when placing a new building or wonder (it is possible
for a wonder to replace a building and vice versa). The new
building or wonder must be able to be legally placed in the
square once the old building or wonder is removed. Players may
not replace a building or wonder belonging to another player.
To replace a building or wonder, first the old building or wonder
is removed from the board. If it is a building, it is returned to
the market. If it is a wonder, the wonder marker and card are
returned to the box and may not be rebuilt for the remainder of
the game.
After the old building or wonder is removed, the new building or
wonder is placed in the now-empty square.
B. Devote to the Arts
"The cry for peace will be a cry in the wilderness, so long as
the spirit of nonviolence does not dominate millions of men and
women."
Mahatma Gandhi
Many great civilizations make their mark on history through art,
song, and literature rather than through industry or conquest.
Consequently, the second type of action a player may take with a
city is to devote the city to the arts. When a player does this, they
collect one culture token from the stockpile, plus one additional
culture token per culture icon ( # ) that appears in the outskirts
of the city being devoted to the arts.
Scouts and Blockades
Scout figures have the ability to gather any culture symbols in
the square they inhabit each turn. For full details on this, see
"Scout Gathering" on page 26.
A square in a city's outskirts that contains one or more enemy
figures (either scouts or armies) does not produce culture for the
city's owner. For full details on this, see "Blockades" on page 27.
Spending Culture
As a civilization creates ever greater and more wondrous pieces
of art, the civilization becomes famous throughout the world.
The amount of fame and cultural influence a civilization has
is measured by the position of the civilization's culture level
marker on the culture track. This marker is advanced through the
spending of culture tokens.
At any point during their City Management Phase, a player may
choose to spend some or all of their culture tokens to advance
their culture level marker up the culture track on the market
board.
The cost to enter each space on the culture track is listed on the
market board and varies depending on how far up the culture
track the player's marker has already advanced. The player
pays the cost listed (for the space their culture level marker is
entering, not the space that the marker is leaving), moves their
culture level marker up the culture track by one space, and then
claims the reward shown on the space their culture level marker
has just entered, as described on the next page.
Higher up the track, advancing the culture level marker costs
trade as well as culture. Both costs must be paid in full for each
space advanced, with trade being spent from the player's trade
dial.

A player may advance as many spaces up the culture track each
turn as they can afford, and multiple culture level markers may
occupy the same space on the culture track.
The culture track consists of three different
types of spaces, which are described below.
Culture Event Spaces
When a player moves their culture level marker
into one of these spaces, they draw a culture
event card from the culture event deck pictured
on the space and add it to their hand in secret.
If doing so causes the player to exceed their
culture hand size (normally two, although it can
be raised by tech), then they must immediately
discard down to their hand size before any culture
event cards can be played.
Great People Spaces
When a player moves their culture level marker into
one of these spaces, they draw a great person marker
at random from the facedown pile. They may then
either immediately place the great person in a city or
hold it in reserve, as described later on this page.
Culture Victory Space
When a player moves their culture level marker
into this space, they immediately win the game with a culture
victory.
Culture Event Cards
"Fortune, which has a great deal of power in other matters but
especially in war, can bring about great changes in a situation
through very slight forces."
Julius Caesar
Culture event cards are special action cards gained by advancing
up the culture track. Each culture event card has a title (A),
timing (B), and an effect (C).
Culture event cards are kept in secret in the player's hand
(although a player may look at their own culture event cards). At
the start of the game, a player's culture hand size is two, meaning
that they can only hold two culture event cards in hand at once.
This number may be increased by tech such as Pottery, however.
As mentioned before, if a player exceeds their culture hand size,
then they must immediately discard down to their hand size
before any culture event cards may be played. Although players
start with a culture hand size of two, they do not actually start
with any culture event cards in hand; these cards must be gained
by advancing up the culture track.
Culture event cards may only be played during the phase
indicated on the card (B, as illustrated earlier). When playing a
culture event card, the player reads the title and the effect and
then performs the effect before discarding the culture event card.
Discarded culture event cards are placed faceup on the bottom of
the appropriate deck. When a deck runs out, it is turned over and
shuffled, creating a new culture event deck.
Great People
"The true test of civilization is, not the census, nor the size of
the cities, nor the crops  no, but the kind of man the country
turns out."
Ralph Waldo Emerson
Certain people rise to prominence within their civilizations.
These great people steer the course of nations and can change
history. Mechanically, great people markers work similarly
to building markers. Once gained, they may be immediately
placed in the outskirts of any city belonging to the player. Great
people can be placed on any terrain except water, and if placed
on a building or wonder, that building or wonder is replaced, as
described on page 17.
However, great people have one significant advantage over
buildings. If they are replaced (by having a building, wonder,
or another great person placed in their square), they are held in
reserve and returned to the player's civilization sheet instead of
being discarded. During the Start of Turn Phase of any turn, a
player may place any great people on their civilization sheet back
on the map in the outskirts of any of their cities. Great people
have no effect when not on the map.
C. Harvest Resources
Valuable resources are important for a civilization's growth.
Without adequate resources, a civilization gradually loses its
ability to function effectively and is swept aside by their better
supplied neighbors. Therefore, the third type of action a city may
take is harvesting a resource from the map. In order to take this
action, the city must have a square with that resource's icon in its
outskirts. If that condition is met, the player takes one resource
token of the given type from the market board and places it on
their civilization sheet. Note that a player cannot harvest a given
resource if the market is out of that type of resource, and a city
may only harvest one resource per action.
For example, if a city contains the icons for two different
resources (silk and iron) in its outskirts, then its city action
may be used to harvest either a silk or an iron token, assuming
any remain. Similarly, if there are two silk icons in the city's
outskirts, the player still only harvests one silk icon.
Resources are used to power resource abilities found on tech
cards. Each time a player wants to use a resource ability, they
must pay its cost by spending the resource (or resources) pictured
next to the ability. For full details, see page 22.
Scouts and Blockades
Scout figures have the ability to allow the harvesting of
resources in the square they inhabit each turn. For full details on
this, see "Scout Gathering" on page 26.
A square in a city's outskirts that contains one or more enemy
figures (either scouts or armies) cannot be harvested from by the
city's owner. For full details on this, see "Blockades" on page 27.
4. Movement
"We shall not cease from exploration
And the end of all our exploring
Will be to arrive where we started
And know the place for the first time."
T. S. Eliot
Warriors and explorers have surveyed their surroundings for
as long as mankind has existed, from the earliest tribesman to
today's modern traveler. Players' armies and scouts have their
chance to travel the world during the Movement Phase. During
this phase, each player, in turn, may move all of their figures,
one at a time. Each figure may move up to a number of squares
equal to its civilization's travel speed. A civilization's travel
speed starts at two, but may be increased by learning tech such
as Horseback Riding. Figures cannot move diagonally. Once a
figure has begun its move, it must complete its move before any
other figure may move.
Moving Groups and Stacking Limit
A player may move several of their figures as a group if they
all begin the Movement Phase in the same square. Doing so
can offer extra strength in battle (see page 23) or allow armies
to protect scouts (see page 20). Figures that begin in the same
square are not required to move together.
However, a civilization may never have more figures (armies and
scouts combined) in a single square on the map than its stacking
limit. Like travel speed, a civilization's stacking limit starts at
two, but may be increased by learning tech such as Masonry.
Crossing Water
At the start of the game, figures cannot enter water squares.
However, acquiring certain techs can allow a civilization's
figures to do so. The Navigation tech allows a player's figures to
cross water but not end their movement in a water square. This
means that the player may not make any move that would result
in a figure ending its move in a water square.
Certain higher-level tech cards, such as Sailing, allow a player's
figures to both move through and end their movement on water
squares. Once a player knows one of these techs, they may
ignore water when moving and may place figures on water
squares when producing the figures.
Unexplored Map Tiles
While a map tile remains facedown, figures cannot move onto or
across it for any reason, nor can the effects of any tech or culture
event card cross or affect any square on an unexplored map tile.
Effectively, the squares on an unexplored tile do not exist.
Discovering Unexplored Map Tiles
A player may discover a facedown map tile by spending one
square of movement when one of their figures is orthogonally
adjacent to the facedown tile. Instead of the figure moving for
that square of movement, the map tile is turned faceup. It is
then oriented so that the arrow at the bottom of the tile points
away from the tile that the figure is on.
The player then looks at the map tile for hut and village icons.
One random hut marker is drawn and placed facedown, without
looking at it, on each square with a hut icon on the map tile.
In addition, one random village marker is drawn and placed
facedown, without looking at it, on each square with a village
icon on it on the map tile.
For example, the red army figure below spends one square of
movement to discover the facedown tile to its right.
The facedown tile is flipped faceup and oriented so that the
white arrow on its edge points away from the tile that the red
army figure is on.
After the tile is flipped over, the player draws a hut and a village
token and, without looking at their other side, places them
facedown on the indicated squares on the tile.
The diagram below shows how the white arrow should appear
when exploring in any of the four directions from the center tile.
Exploring Huts and Villages
Scout figures cannot enter a square containing a hut or village
marker. An army figure that enters a square containing a hut
or village marker must immediately end its movement and is
considered to be exploring the hut or village.
If the marker is a hut, it is peacefully absorbed by the invading
civilization. The player takes the hut marker, looks at it, and then
places it facedown on their civilization sheet. Hut markers have
resources printed on their backs and may be spent like resource
tokens taken from the market, except that they are returned to
the box after being spent, rather than being added to the market.
If the marker is a village, it attempts to repel the invading
civilization. The player to the left of the invading player
becomes the "barbarian player" and draws one artillery, one
infantry, and one mounted unit from the respective decks (if
one or more of the decks are depleted, make up the difference
from one of the other decks  barbarian player's choice). These
three units are barbarians and must be kept separate from
the barbarian player's own units. A battle then takes place
between the barbarian player (using only the barbarian units)
and the invading player. The barbarian player is the defender,
and barbarian units are always rank 1 (Archer, Spearman, or
Horseman). For full details on resolving battles, see "Combat"
on page 23.
After the battle, if the invading player won, that
player takes the village marker and looks at it. If it
shows a great person icon, the player discards the
village marker and then gains a random great person.
Otherwise, the village marker shows a resource and
is placed facedown on the player's civilization sheet,
where it acts like a hut marker, as explained above.
If the invading player loses the battle, the army figure that
entered the square (or the entire group of figures, if a group
of figures entered) is killed and is returned to the player's
civilization sheet. However, unlike losing a battle to another
player, there is no additional penalty for the loss.
Tip: Attacking barbarians without some sort of advantage
beyond a player's starting units is a risky proposition. It's
advisable for players to build extra units, upgrade their units,
attack with a group of army figures, or go in with an ace up their
sleeve (such as the Metalworking tech and an iron token).
Enemy Figures
Scouts cannot enter a square containing enemy figures. If
an army enters a square containing any enemy figures, its
movement immediately ends. If the square contains only enemy
scouts, the scouts are immediately killed and the attacking player
collects loot as though they had won a battle (see page 25). If
the square contains at least one enemy army, a battle occurs (see
page 23). If the square contains a mix of both enemy armies and
scouts, a battle occurs, but if the losing side in the battle has any
scouts in the square, they are killed along with the armies; loot is
then collected as normal.
Example: An army enters a square containing two armies and
a scout. A battle occurs, with the attacking player emerging
triumphant. The two armies and the scout are all killed, and the
attacker receives loot for killing figures.
Friendly and Enemy Cities
A player may move their figures through their own city centers,
but they may not end any figure's movement in their city center.
Scouts may enter enemy city outskirts, but they cannot enter
enemy city centers. Armies may enter enemy city outskirts.
They may also enter an enemy city center, but doing so
immediately results in an attack on the city (see page 23).
5. Research
"All religions, arts and sciences are branches of the same tree.
All these aspirations are directed toward ennobling man's life,
lifting it from the sphere of mere physical existence and leading
the individual towards freedom."
Albert Einstein
As new technologies are discovered by a civilization, new
avenues and opportunities open up as well. From Pottery to
Space Flight, these advances have the potential to profoundly
change civilizations. During the Research Phase, players may
acquire these technologies, which are represented by tech cards.
In this phase, each player may choose to research one tech card.
Each tech card has a name (A), an icon (B), a level (C), and one
to three abilities (D).
To research a tech, a player must meet the minimum trade
cost for the tech and have a legal space in their civilization's
tech pyramid (see next page). If they meet both requirements,
the player places the chosen tech card facedown in their tech
pyramid. Once all players have chosen their tech cards for the
turn, all researched tech cards are revealed simultaneously.
Tech learned by a player only applies to that player. Just because
Rome learns Engineering doesn't mean that Egypt learns it
as well. Each player must research tech cards for their tech
pyramids individually.

Trade Cost
A player must have a certain minimum amount of trade on
their trade dial in order to research a tech, depending on the
tech's level. A player needs at least 6 trade to research a level I
tech. This threshold is indicated on the players' trade dials by
replacing the number 6 with a "I" to represent tech level I. It
costs an additional 5 trade for each level thereafter (11 for level
II, 16 for level III, 21 for level IV, and 26 for level V). These
higher tech levels are marked on the trade dial in the same way.
Researching a tech spends all of the player's remaining trade,
no matter how much trade they had before researching. The
only exception to this rule is for players who possess coins.
Coins allow a player to retain 1 trade after researching for
each coin the player possesses. Having coins never increases a
player's current trade; it only allows a player to retain trade they
already have. For a full explanation of coins, see page 26.
Example 1: A player wishes to research Sailing, a level II tech.
Looking at the trade dial, they see that level II techs require at
least 11 trade. Fortunately, the player has 18 trade (and a legal
space on their tech pyramid), so they reduce their trade to 0 and
learn Sailing.
Example 2: If the player from example 1 possessed four coins,
they would retain 4 trade after learning Sailing.
The Tech Pyramid
The second requirement a player must meet to learn a new
tech is to have a legal space in their tech pyramid to place the
new tech. Level I tech cards may always be legally placed in a
player's tech pyramid, and indeed, they form the bottom row
of the pyramid. However, when a player learns a level II tech,
it must be placed above two level I tech cards already in their
pyramid. Similarly, level III tech cards must be placed above
two level II tech cards in their pyramid, and so on. Lower-level
tech cards represent the foundation for higher-level techs. As
a player's tech pyramid grows, it resembles a real pyramid, as
shown below and in the "Tech Pyramid" sidebar on page 11.
Level III
Level IV
Level V
Level II
Level I
The highest level tech is Space Flight, at level V. If a player
learns this tech, they immediately win the game with a tech
victory. It is worth noting that the fewest level I tech cards a
player must know to reach level V is five (and a minimum of 15
techs overall is required for a tech victory, see page 22).
Exception: A civilization's starting tech is always placed in the
bottom row of its tech pyramid regardless of its actual level.
Tech Card Abilities
Each tech that a player learns gives them certain benefits, which
could be to unlock certain items for production, upgrade existing
items or abilities, or provide new abilities. These benefits of tech
cards are explained in more detail in the next few sections.
Unlocking Units, Buildings, and Governments
When a player learns a tech showing a new unit type, building,
or government, they immediately gain the ability to produce that
unit or building or to change to that government. This is known
as unlocking the item. At the start of the game, all figures, the
three basic unit types (artillery, infantry, and mounted), and the
Despotism government are unlocked. Everything else must be
unlocked through researching tech.
Example: The Code of Laws tech (shown below) unlocks the
Trading Post building (lower-right of the card) and the Republic
government (upper-right), allowing the player to produce Trading
Posts and change to a Republic government.
Upgrading Units
When a player learns a tech with a unit upgrade on it, they check
to see if they already know a better upgrade for that unit type.
If not, they find the military tech marker for their improved unit
type and place it below the appropriate unit deck on the market
board to show that their units of that type have been upgraded
(or flip the current marker over if the new rank is on the back).
Note: Rank 2 is on the back of each rank 1 military tech marker,
and rank 3 and rank 4 (marked with a star) are the front and back
of a second military tech marker.
For example, when a player learns Chivalry, they check to see
if their mounted unit military tech marker is already better
than rank 2 (indicated by the two stripes). If not, they flip their
mounted military tech marker to the rank 2 side.
All units of that type that the player has already produced are
automatically upgraded immediately. However, once a player
has upgraded a unit, they must now pay the new, higher cost to
produce new units of that type.
Continuing the example above, now that the player's mounted
units are Knights, it costs 7 ! instead of 5 ! to produce new
mounted units, but any mounted units the player already has are
automatically upgraded to Knights.

Upgrading Buildings
Some buildings have a basic and an upgraded form, such as the
Granary (basic) and the Aqueduct (upgraded). These buildings
are printed on the front and back of the same markers. Looking
at the market board, upgraded buildings have an arrow next to
their names. When a player learns a tech unlocking an upgraded
building, they immediately flip over any of the corresponding
basic buildings that they've already produced in their cities.
So, for example, when a player learns Engineering, which
unlocks Aqueducts, they flip over any Granaries they've already
produced, immediately upgrading them to Aqueducts.
However, as with upgrading units, once a player has unlocked
the upgraded version of a building, they can no longer produce
the basic version of the building and must now produce the new,
higher-cost building.
Continuing the example above, once a player learns Engineering,
they can no longer produce Granaries for 5 ! , but must now
produce the more expensive Aqueducts for 8 ! .
Note: A player does not need to know the tech that unlocks the
basic form of a building in order to learn the tech that unlocks
the upgraded form of that building.
Resource Abilities
Many tech cards, such as Currency, have abilities on them that
require the player to spend resource tokens to use the abilities.
These abilities are called resource abilities. Each resource
ability has (A) a picture of the resource or resources required to
use it (with a question mark meaning any resource of the player's
choice), (B) the phase in which the ability may be used, and (C)
the actual ability itself.
For example, Currency (shown above) allows a player to spend
one incense resource token to gain three culture tokens during
the player's City Management Phase.
Each given resource ability may only be used once per
turn, regardless of how many resource tokens a player has.
However, if a player knows several techs with similar resource
abilities (such as Currency and Chivalry), then each may be used
once per turn.
Other Abilities
Other abilities that can be granted by tech cards include
improved traits such as travel speed (Horseback Riding) or
maximum number of armies (Masonry) and constant abilities
such as the ability to split a city's production to produce two
items (Engineering). A key to all of the icons found on tech cards
can be found on the back cover of this rulebook.
Winning the Game
As briefly mentioned earlier, there are four ways to win Sid
Meier's Civilization: The Board Game. Each method requires a
civilization to focus on a different aspect of the game to achieve
greatness.
Culture Victory
A culture victory is attained by spending enough culture and
trade to advance to the end of the culture track on the market
board (see page 1718). As soon as a player advances to the space
marked "Culture Victory," that player wins the game.
A player wishing to win with a culture victory should
concentrate on adding culture icons to their cities and devoting
their cities to the arts. Later on, the player will also need to
make sure their cities are producing enough trade as well. Techs
that unlock culture-producing buildings (such as Theology) or
which have incense-powered abilities (such as Currency) are
most useful for this type of victory. Certain culture-producing
wonders, such as Stonehenge, are also helpful.
Tech Victory
A tech victory is achieved upon researching the Space Flight
tech, which is the only level 5 tech in the game. It takes a
minimum of five level 1 techs, four level 2 techs, three level 3
techs, and two level 4 techs to research Space Flight, meaning
that a tech victory requires a minimum of 15 techs.
A player wishing to win with a tech victory should concentrate
on adding trade icons to their cities and finding ways to
research more than once a turn (such as through culture event
cards). Techs that unlock trade-producing buildings (such as
Code of Laws) or which have trade-producing abilities (such
as Horseback Riding) are most useful for this type of victory.
Certain wonders that help research, such as the Statue of Liberty,
are also useful.
Economic Victory
An economic victory is completed by accumulating 15 coins on
the player's economic dial. Coins are either gained from squares
on the map and building (see "Coins on the Map," page 26) or
from techs (see "Coin Tokens" on page 26).
A player wishing to win with an economic victory should dabble
in a variety of different aspects of the game, including trade,
resources, combat, and culture. While some coins can be gained
from buildings (such as Banks), a number of the player's coins
will have to come from doing different tasks, as stated on certain
techs. Pottery, Code of Laws, Printing Press, and Democracy all
allow a player to gain coins by completing particular tasks. In
addition, certain wonders, such as the Panama Canal, are helpful
in accumulating coins.
Military Victory
A military victory is achieved by conquering another player's
capital city (see "Combat," below). This requires the player to
build up their military forces and technology.
A player wishing to win with a military victory should increase
their military power. This includes building a supply of units and
upgrading them with techs (such as Gunpowder), raising their
figure stacking limit (such as with Biology), and accumulating
other strength bonuses for combat (such as from Academies).
Military players should beware of culture events and may find
certain wonders such as Himeji Samurai Castle to be helpful.
Other Rules
This section contains additional rules to the game.

COMBAT:
"The great questions of the day will not be settled by means of
speeches and majority decisions...but by iron and blood."
Otto von Bismarck
Battle is the struggle of one civilization against another
for dominance. When an army figure moves into a square
containing a village marker, an enemy army figure, or an
enemy city, a battle takes place. The player whose army figure
is entering the square is the attacker, while the player whose
figure or city is being attacked is the defender. If the attacker
is attacking a village, the player to the attacker's left becomes
the defender. Generally, the defender is placed at a slight
disadvantage in a battle, since the element of surprise is on the
attacker's side. When a battle begins, the attacker and defender
take the following steps:
1. Assembling the Batt le Force
The attacker and defender each shuffle their standing forces and
draw a number of unit cards equal to their battle hand size at
random. A player's battle hand size starts at three and may be
increased in the following ways:
+2 hand size for each friendly a  rmy figure in the square
beyond the first (remember that players cannot exceed their
civilization's stacking limit)
 +1 hand size if governed by Fundamentalism
 +3 hand size if defending a city or capital.
A unit card has four different sides, as shown below. Each side
has a unit name (A), military rank (B), strength value (C), trump
symbol (D), and unit type (E).

When using a unit card in battle, a player only uses the side
corresponding to the rank of their matching military tech
marker. For instance, if the player's mounted military tech
marker is set to rank 2 (the side with two stripes), that player
only pays attention to the rank 2 side of their mounted units  in
this case, the "Knight" side. For example, the unit below would
have a strength of 2:
Note: The first three ranks of military tech are represented with
one, two, or three stripes, while the fourth rank is represented by
a star.
After a player draws their battle force, they may wish to turn
their cards so that each card is oriented such that the top edge is
the one they are using, as indicated by the unit's rank. A player's
battle force cards are held in hand and kept secret from their
opponent until played during battle.
Tip 1: A player's battle hand size is one of the best indicators of
strength in battle, but only if the player actually has enough units
in their standing forces to make use of it. Players should always
try to keep their number of units in their standing forces at or
above their expected battle hand size.
Tip 2: Just as having too few units can be dangerous, it can also
be bad to have too many units. Since a player's battle force is
selected at random from their standing forces, having too many
units reduces the player's chances of drawing the units they
really want in battle.
2. Calculating Combat Bonuses
Next, the players look to see if either side has any combat
bonuses. If so, the player with the highest combat bonus takes
the combat bonus card and places it in front of them, turned so
that it is set to their combat bonus minus their opponent's combat
bonus. For instance, if one player has a bonus of +12 and the
other player has a bonus of +8, the first player receives a combat
bonus card turned to its +4 side. The available combat bonuses
are as follows:
 +2 for every Barracks the player has built
 +4 for every Academy the player has built
 +4 for every Great General the player has on the map
 +6 if defending a non-capital city
 +12 if defending a capital city
 +4 if defending a walled capital or non-capital city (stacks
with either of the two other city bonuses).
Tip: Every +4 in combat bonuses a player has is equivalent to
approximately one unit. Although unit strength varies over the
course of the game, this is an easy and reasonably accurate rule
of thumb for players to remember.
23
3. Engaging in Battle
Now, starting with the defender, then alternating back and forth,
each player must play a unit from their battle force faceup on the
table between them until both players have played all of the units
in their battle forces.
Exception: If the attacker is attacking a walled city, the attacker
must play the first unit rather than the defender.
When a player plays the first unit in battle, this creates what is
called the first front. After that, each time a player plays a unit,
they must either start a new front or attack an existing enemy
front (if any exist to attack).
Starting a New Front
Starting a new front is simply playing a unit without attacking
another unit. The newly played unit remains in play until killed
or until the end of the battle. There can never be more than one
unit in a front.
Example 1: Below, player A has a strength 3 mounted unit
in play. Player B, not wanting to attack it, plays a strength 2
mounted unit below it in a new front. Since there are no other
units in either front, no attacks occur.
Player B
Player A
Attacking an Enemy Front
To attack an existing front, the player places their unit card in
front of a faceup enemy unit already played in this battle. The
two unit cards then immediately attack each other. Each unit
card deals a number of wounds equal to its strength to the
other unit. Any unit that suffers wounds equal to its strength
is immediately killed and returned faceup to the bottom of the
unit deck it was originally acquired from. If a unit survives
the attack, wound tokens are placed on the card to indicate the
damage. All wounds go away at the end of the battle.
Example 2: This time, player B's strength 2 unit is in play first.
Player A, having a strength 3 unit in hand, plays their unit into
the strength 2 unit's front, attacking it. The strength 3 unit
deals three wounds to the weaker unit, killing it, and suffers
two wounds in return. This damage is not enough to kill the
strength 3 unit, so two wound tokens are placed on it to record
the damage. Should this unit survive until the end of the battle, it
will then fully heal.
Player B
Player A
Even if a unit was previously wounded, it still inflicts its full
strength in wounds to any unit that attacks it.
Example 3: After killing the strength 2 unit in example 3, player
A's wounded strength 3 unit is attacked by another strength 3 unit
played by player B. Although it still has two wounds, player A's
unit still deals its full damage to player B's unit. In this instance,
both units are killed, since each deals three wounds to the other.
Player B
Player A
One of the key military concepts in Sid Meier's
Civilization: The Board Game is the difference between
armies and units.
Armies are plastic figures that move around the map,
indicating the presence of a player's military forces.
However, without units, armies have no strength and the
player is extremely unlikely to win a battle.
Units are square cards that are used to resolve battles.
Units represent the strength of a player's military forces.
However, units have no physical location on the map and
cannot be used outside a player's cities without an army.
Thus, a player needs both armies and units to succeed at a
military victory.
Armies vs. Units
Trumping Units
Not all unit types are equally capable against all other unit
types. In fact, there is a rock-paper-scissors relationship between
artillery, infantry, and mounted units, as shown below:
This relationship is shown on the unit cards by their trump
symbols. For example, infantry units are particularly effective
against mounted units (e.g., pikemen versus knights), so infantry
units have the mounted unit symbol as their trump symbol.
When a unit attacks or is attacked by a unit that it has pictured
on its card as a trump symbol, it trumps that unit, dealing its
damage before the other unit can do so. If this damage kills the
trumped unit, the trumped unit deals no damage back to the unit
trumping it, since it is already dead before it can deal its damage.
Example 4: In example 3, previously, if player B's attacking
strength 3 unit was an infantry unit, it would trump player A's
wounded unit. Thus, player B's unit would deal its 3 wounds
first, killing the wounded unit before it could attack back, and
would survive the attack without suffering a single wound.
Player B
Player A
TRUMP
Tip: Obviously, a player whose units are trumped frequently
during a battle is at a serious disadvantage. Players should
observe what units other players are producing and react
accordingly.
Battle Abilities
Some tech cards have resource abilities that are used during
battle. These abilities are always used before or after attacking
an enemy front, never during  even if some of their effects may
last through an attack.
Aircraft Units
If a player learns the Flight tech, they become capable of
producing aircraft units. Aircraft units are very powerful units
(their strength ranges from 5 to 7) that cannot trump or be
trumped by any unit. This means that aircraft units reliably deal
their damage, no matter what enemies they are faced with.
4. Resolving the Battle
After both players have played all of their battle forces, the battle
is over. First, all wounds are removed from the surviving units in
the battle. Then, each player tallies up the strength of all of their
surviving units, adding in the value of the combat bonus card (if
they have it). The player with the highest total wins the battle,
with ties going to the defender.
Winner's Figure Losses
The winner then loses one army figure in the square for every
two units of theirs that were killed in the battle. A player's last
army figure in the square can never be lost this way.
Winner's Loot
The winner of the battle receives a reward depending on the
loser's circumstances in the battle.
If the loser had one or more figures in the square:
The loser's figures in that square are all killed and are removed
from the board (although they may be built again later). The
winner may then take their choice of one of the following from
the loser:
Up to three points of trade f  rom the loser's trade dial
 Up to three culture tokens
 Any one resource token (facedown hut and village tokens
may be chosen, but the winner does not get to see what they
are before choosing).
If the loser was defending one of their non-capital cities:
The loser's city is destroyed. Its city marker is returned to its
owner's civilization sheet. Any buildings in its outskirts are
returned to the market, and any wonders or great people in its
outskirts are returned to the box and removed from the game.
The winner's figures remain in the square where the city center
was, and the winner then gets to do one of the following:
 Learn one of the loser's known techs that the winner does not
know, without having to pay the trade cost. The winner must
have a legal spot in their tech pyramid to do so (see page 21).
 Steal one of the loser's culture event cards. The winner only
gets to look at the card backs when choosing.
 Steal up to any two resource tokens from the loser. Facedown
hut and village tokens may be chosen, but the winner does
not get to see what they are before choosing.
If the loser was defending their capital city:
 The winner immediately wins the game with a military
victory.
Tip: Since the first player to conquer a capital city wins the game,
players must be careful not to weaken their opponents too much
when there are other hostile armies near that player's capital.

INFANTRY MOUNTED
ARTILLERY
Aftermath
If the game isn't over, any surviving units (whether owned by the
winner or the loser) are then returned to their owner's standing
forces. Any killed units are placed faceup on the bottom of their
respective unit decks.
Tip: Winning a battle against a powerful defender such as a
capital city or a strong military player requires a mix of increases
to the player's battle hand size, upgrades to the player's units,
combat bonuses, and enough unit cards to fill up their hand.
However, the rewards for successful attacks are very significant,
and the outcome of the entire game can be turned around by a
canny military maneuver.
Coins and Economic Power
"Don't tell me where your priorities are. Show me where you
spend your money and I'll tell you what they are."
James W. Frick
Although a leader may have great ambitions for their
civilization, ultimately very little can be accomplished without
the industry of the people working with the bounty of the land to
create a healthy economy. A player may acquire economic power
in the form of coins  either coins printed on building markers
and map tiles, or coin tokens placed on certain tech cards (such
as Code of Laws) as a reward for accomplishing particular tasks.
When a player gains a coin, they advance their economy dial.
Should the player later lose the coin, their economy dial must be
reduced accordingly.
Coins have two primary effects. First, when a player researches
a tech, they may keep one trade for every coin they have. So, for
instance, a player with five coins would be left with five trade
after researching a tech. Coins do not allow a player to keep
trade after any event other than researching a tech. Therefore,
a player can still have their trade reduced below their number
of coins when spending trade to rush production or when trade
is taken after the loss of a battle. It should be noted that having
coins never increases a player's current trade  it merely allows
the player to retain the trade they have already accumulated.
The second major effect that coins have is that a player who
accumulates 15 coins immediately wins the game with an
economic victory (see "Winning the Game" on page 22).
Other abilities may be granted to a player by certain tech cards,
such as Computers, based on the number of coins they have
accumulated.
Coins on the Map
Coins gained from squares on the map  whether from a natural
gold deposit in the mountains or from a building placed in a
square  are only kept as long as the player retains control of the
square (i.e., the square is contained in the outskirts of one of the
player's cities or one of the player's scouts remains in the square
to gather from it). If an enemy figure blockades the square
containing the coin, it is lost while the enemy figure remains
there (see page 27). Similarly, if a building granting a coin to a
player is destroyed, the coin is lost.
Coin Tokens
Coin tokens placed on a tech card as a reward for accomplishing
a certain task are treated just like coins on the map, except that
there is a maximum number of times a given task will provide a
coin token. Coin tokens advance the economy dial when gained
and cannot be lost.
Scout Gathering
Scouts are of vital importance to a player's civilization. One of
their critical roles is to send home trade, production, culture,
coins, and resources from distant locations. Each turn, beginning
the turn after it was placed on the map, a scout gathers the
contents of the square it occupies. The player declares which of
their cities the scout is "sending" the square to during the Start
of Turn Phase, and all of the icons in that square (including
trade, production, culture, coins, and resources) are then
considered to be in that city's outskirts for the rest of the turn.
Consequently, the city benefits from any trade, production, or
other icons in the square for the turn.
The city above contains the following icons:
Thus, it adds 3 @ to the red player's trade dial each turn during
the Trade Phase. During City Management, its action may be
used to do one of the following three things:
 Produce an item that costs 5 ! or less
 Generate 1 # (1 for the city, plus 0 additional # symbols)
 Harvest either a silk or an incense resource token.
For a full explanation of how that was determined, see
"Collecting Trade" on page 14, and "City Management" on
pages 1518.
Example 1: A scout in a forest sends its square to the
previously discussed city, increasing the city's production by
two for the turn.
Example 2: A scout in a natural wonder sends the square to
the previously discussed city. That turn, the city devotes itself
to culture. Because the city gains the symbols of the square the
scout is in, the city produces one more culture token than normal
(two total).
Note that, in this example, although the city still receives the two
extra production from the forest, it doesn't matter because the
city devotes itself to the arts for its action rather than production.
Example 3: A scout in a square with a wheat resource icon sends
the square to the previously discussed city. That turn, that city
harvests a resource and may choose to harvest a wheat, silk, or
incense resource since the scout's space is considered part of the
city's outskirts.
Blockades
Enemy forces, properly placed, can prevent a city from obtaining
some of the supplies it is used to obtaining. Thus, a square in a
city's outskirts that contains one or more enemy figures (either
scouts or armies) does not generate production, trade, culture,
coins, or resources for the city's owner. A square may be
blockaded even if it contains a building or a great person.
Wonders are not immune to blockades either. While an enemy
figure remains in the same square as a wonder's marker, the
special ability on the wonder's card cannot be used and the
culture produced by its marker cannot be collected.
Buildings, wonders, great people, and scouts cannot be placed
in a blockaded square after being produced. Army figures may
be placed in a blockaded square, but doing so immediately
results in a battle, with the blockading player as the defender (see
"Combat" on page 23).
A scout may gather icons in a blockaded square in the outskirts
of an enemy city. In this case, the square is considered to be a
part of the city the scout is sending it to for the turn rather than
the city being blockaded.
Example: An enemy scout is in a forest in the outskirts of the
city discussed earlier and sends the square to one of the scout's
own cities. For that turn, the production of the scout's city is
increased by two and the production of the city being blockaded
is reduced by two.
Obsoleting Wonders
"My name is Ozymandias, King of Kings:
Look on my works, ye mighty, and despair!"
Ozymandias, Percy Bysshe Shelley
Certain techs (Monarchy and Gunpowder) allow a player to
obsolete a wonder. When a wonder is obsoleted, turn its wonder
card facedown, but leave its wonder marker on the map. The
wonder's special ability is negated and cannot be used for the
rest of the game. However, the wonder marker still produces
culture when the city it is in is devoted to the arts.

GLOSSARY:
Army: A plastic figure representing a player's military forces.
Attacker: In battle, the side that began the combat by moving.
Barbarians: Uncivilized tribes found in villages. Barbarians
must be defeated to claim the resources from a village.
Barbarians are always rank 1 and are controlled by the player to
the active player's left.
Battle Force: Unit cards drawn by a player at the start of a
battle.
Battle Hand Size: The number of unit cards a player draws from
their standing forces at the start of battle.
Blockade: When a square in a city's outskirts contains an enemy
figure. The presence of the enemy figure prevents the use of that
square by the city it is part of the outskirts of.
Capital: A player's starting city.
City Center: The center square of a city. It produces nothing.
City Outskirts: The eight squares surrounding a city center.
These squares generate the city's trade, production, culture, etc.
Coin: Measure of a civilization's economic prosperity. Makes a
civilization generate trade (and production, with the proper tech)
more efficiently.
Culture: Measure of a civilization's artistic and philosophic
progress. Used primarily to advance up the culture track.
Culture Hand Size: The maximum number of culture events a
player may have in hand at once.
Defender: In battle, the side that did not begin the combat.
Discovering: The act of turning a map tile faceup through the
expenditure of movement by an adjacent figure.
Front: An area within a battle. A front may hold only one unit
from each civilization in the battle, and any units in the same
front immediately attack each other.
Government: A civilization's ruling body. Governments
determine a civilization's character and overall goals. Over time,
a civilization may pass through many types of government as its
character changes.
Great Person: Prominent people within their civilizations who
change history. Great people function much like buildings do.
Hut: A peaceful tribe found on the map.
Limited Buildings: Buildings marked with a star. Each city may
only contain one limited building in total.
Natural Wonder: A square on the map that is unusually
beautiful or inspiring. Natural wonders provide culture in
addition to their normal resources.
Production: Measure of a civilization's industry. Primarily used
to create new buildings, units, figures, or wonders.
Research: Research allows civilizations to learn new techs
which help them grow more powerful and efficient.
Resource: Special tokens that may be spent to activate certain
abilities found on tech cards.
Resource Abilities: Any ability that costs one or more resource
tokens to activate.
Scout: A plastic figure representing a player's non-military
forces.
Stacking Limit: The maximum number of figures a civilization
may have in a single square. Represents the civilization's
communication and organizational capability.
Standing Forces: A deck containing the unit cards a player
has built. A player's battle force is randomly drawn from their
standing forces.
Strength: The general measure of the power of a unit card.
Tech: Tech represents a certain discovery or invention. Techs are
placed in their civilization's tech pyramid as they are learned.
Tech learned by one player only apply to that particular player.
Tech Pyramid: Techs are organized in the tech pyramid into
five different levels. Higher level techs must each be placed
above two techs of the next level down.
Terrain: There are five types of terrain on the map: desert,
forest, grassland, mountain, and water. Terrain affects where
buildings may be placed.
Trade: Measure of a civilization's scientific progress. Used
primarily to learn techs.
Travel Speed: The number of squares a civilization's figures
may move each turn.
Trump: A unit that trumps another unit gets to strike first in
battle.
Unit: A card representing part of a player's military strength.
Unlocked: Able to be produced. Units, governments, and
buildings are typically unlocked by learning certain tech cards.
Upgrade: A tech ability that improves a unit or building,
transforming it into a new type of unit or building.
Village: A warlike tribe found on the map.
Wonder: An amazing invention or construction that brings great
glory to the civilization that creates it. Wonders provide both
culture and unique abilities to their owner.
Wounds: Damage inflicted on a unit during battle. All wounds
are healed at the end of every battle.

CREDITS:
Game Design: Kevin Wilson
Special thanks to Tom Ebert, J.R. Godwin, James Hata, Michael
Hurley, Pam Vanmuijen, and Team XYZZY. Additionally, a very
special thanks to Sid Meier and the good people at Firaxis for
letting me play with their toys.
Producer: Sally Hopper
Editing: Mark O'Connor
Proofreading: James Hata, Michael Hurley, Patricia Meredith
Graphic Design: Andrew Navaro, WiL Springer
Art Direction: Zo Robinson
Map and Building Art: Henning Ludvigsen
Abraham Lincoln Art: Tom Garden
Cover Art: Jung Park
Figure Designs: Jason Beaudoin
Additional art was used from the Firaxis archives. Thanks to all
of these artists for their contributions.
Playtesters: C. Biancheria, Bryan Bornmueller, Matt Cary,
Joseph L. Casadonte Jr., Anthony Doepner, Shaun Donnelly, Ken
Drake, Jean9 Duncan, Tom Ebert, J.R. Godwin, Kyle Hough,
John Goodenough, Eric Hanson, James Hata, Steve Horvath,
Michael Hurley, David Johnson, Sally Hopper, Troy Karkula,
Evan Kinne, Jay Little, Thyme Ludwig, Walter McKinnon,
Mitch Melykson, Andrew Meredith, Seana Miller, Alan R.
Moon, Erin A. O'Malley, Richard Nauertz, Scott Nicholson,
Mario Pawlowski, Thaadd Powell, Guy Reed, Brady Sadler,
John Skogerboe, Rob Smolka, Anton Torres, Pam Vanmuijen,
BreeAnn Vosberg, Peter Wocken, Kevin Wood, Michelle Zentis
Production Manager: Eric Knight
FFG Lead Producer: Michael Hurley
FFG Lead Developer: Corey Konieczka
Publisher: Christian T. Petersen
Firaxis Credits
Art Director: Steve Ogden
Marketing Director: Kelley Gilmore
Marketing Associate: Peter Murray
Firaxis Playtesters: Ed Beach, David McDonough, Peter
Murray, Brian Wade
2k Credits
Director of Digital Sales: Paul Crockett
 19912010 Take-Two Interactive Software, Inc. and its subsidiaries. Sid Meier's
Civilization, Civ, Civilization, Firaxis Games, the Firaxis Games logo, 2K, the 2K Games
logo and Take-Two Interactive Software are all trademarks and/or registered trademarks
of Take-Two Interactive Software, Inc. in the United States and/or foreign countries. Board
game design  2010 Fantasy Flight Publishing, Inc. Fantasy Flight Games, Fantasy
Flight Supply, and the FFG logo are trademarks of Fantasy Flight Publishing, Inc. All
rights reserved to their respective owners. Fantasy Flight Games is located at 1975 West
County Road B2, Suite 1, Roseville, MN, 55113, USA and can be reached by telephone at
651-639-1905. Retain this information for your records. Not suitable for children under 36
months due to small parts. Components may vary from those shown. Made in China. THIS
PRODUCT IS NOT A TOY. NOT INTENDED FOR USE OF PERSONS 12 YEARS OF AGE
OR YOUNGER.


INDEX
Armies
Movement 19
Producing 15
vs. Units 24
Barbarians 20
Blockades 27
Building New Cities 13
Placement Restrictions and
Example 13
Buildings
City Walls 17
Limited 17
Producing 16
Replacing 17
Terrain Restrictions 16
Civilization Sheet Breakdown 7
City Management Phase
Overview 15
Devoting to the Arts 17
Producing
Buildings 16
Figures 1516
Units 16
Wonders 17
City Walls, see Buildings
Coins 26
Combat
Aircraft 25
Battle Abilities 25
Battle Hand Size 23
Bonuses 23
Fronts and Attacks 24
Losses and Loot 25
Resolving 25
Trumping 25
Components 36
Culture
Blockading 27
Collecting, see Devoting to
the Arts
Looting 25
Scout Gathering 26
Spending 17
Culture Events
Gaining 1718
Hand Size 17
Culture Track
Advancing on 17
Spaces 18
Devoting to the Arts 17
First Game for Beginners 8
Game Setup
General 810
Player 1012
Setup Diagram 9
Game Turn Overview 12
Golden Rule 8
Governments
Anarchy 14
Changing 14
Great People 18
Gaining from Villages 20
Harvesting Resources 18
Huts
Placing 19
Exploring 20
Map Tiles
Exploring 19
Icon Breakdown 7
Movement
Cities 20
Crossing Water 19
Discovering Map Tiles 1920
Enemy Figures 20
Exploring Huts & Villages 20
Groups 19
Stacking Limit 19
Production
Blockading 27
Rushing with Trade 15
Scouts Gathering 26
Spending 1517
vs. Trade 14
Research Phase
Overview 13
Tech Pyramid 11, 21
Trade Cost to Research 21
Resources
Blockading 27
Collecting, see Harvesting
Resources
Looting 25
Scout Gathering 26
Spending 17
Scouts
Gathering 26
Movement 19
Producing 15
Start of Turn Phase 1314
Overview 13
Building New Cities 13
Tech Cards
Abilities 2122, back cover
Researching 2021
Tech Pyramid 11, 21
Trade
Blockading 27
Collecting 14
Scouts Gathering 26
vs. Production 14
Trade Phase
Overview 14
Collecting Trade 14
Negotiating and Trading 15
Units
Overview 23
In Battle 24
Producing 16
vs. Armies 24
Victory Conditions 2, 2223
Culture 22
Economic 22
Military 23
Tech 22
Villages
Placing 19
Exploring 20
Barbarians 20
Wonders
Discounts on 17
Obsoleting 27
Producing 17

CREDITS:
Manufactured by Strom Manufacturing, Inc.
Playtesters: Brian "Big Mac" McCarthy, Benjamin Adelman, David Andrews, Cameron Boozarjomehri, Raymond Carley, David Colmenares, Stelios Despotakis, Cas Gray, Yizhu Gu, Muneeb Hai, Matt Hin, Ann Iglesias, Yang Jiao, Elad Karni, Mike Leider, Austin Matthews, Guru Prashanth, Addison Sadewater, Markham Shofner, CJ Smith, Christian Tjandraatmadja, Jay Walker, Wenting Yu,
Ian Zang, Jerry Buhle, Trish Buhle, Brian Busha, Dingyan Zheng, Brick Busha, Shu-Chu, Chun Yin Fung, Patrick Jost, Max Gibiansky, Mattijs Reinen, Matthew Simpson, Tony Truong, Teddy Brewer, Curtis Redus, Matt Hin, Tricia Victor, Federico "Kentervin" Luison, Neelam Balasubramanian, Cody Heim, Eric Mullen, Ian Swift, Rebecca Streitz, Matt Hogg, Solomon Stein, Cory Dawson,
Kristen Armellino, and Addison Sadewater.
Special Thanks to: Our collective special loves, who put up with much and ask for little in return: Kristen, Jennifer C., Violet,
Jennifer W., and Denice. We also want to thank Richard Ham, Sen-Foong Lim, Lance Myxter, Brent Poyis, Cas Gray,
Misha Lavrov, and Todd Sanders.. As well as The Game Preserve and Game Time for providing us a place to call home.
Huge thanks to all the awesome supporters that backed this fun project! You guys made it possible!
 2016 Lone Oak Games. Oakland, CA 94610. All rights reserved.




GAME NAME:
Blood Rage

Rules Of The Game

CREDITS:
Game Design and Development: Eric M. Lang
Art: Adrian Smith
Producers: Thiago Aranha, Percy de Montblanc
Graphic Design: Mathieu Harlaut
Miniatures Directing: Mike McVey
Sculpting: Grgory Clavilier, Jacques-Alexandre Gillois, Jason
Hendricks, Steve Saunders, Stephane Simon, Remy Tremblay,
Jose Roig.
Game Board: Henning Ludvigsen
Logo: Georges Clarenko, Adrian Smith.
Rules: Thiago Aranha, Ed Bolme, Jonathan Moriarity.
Playtesting: Thiago Aranha, Viola Bafile, Ed Bolme, Nathon
Braymore, Laurie Cheung, Les Cheung, Christopher Chung,
Glenn Crawford, Susan "Vella" Davis, Robert Flick, Jason
Henke, Tim Huesken, Guilherme Goulart, Vitor Grigoleto,
Sean Jacquemain, Rob Kien-Peng Lim, June King, C. Scott
Kippen, Sonja Lang, Al Leduc, Adam Marostica, Jonathan
Moriarity, P. Orbis Proszynski, Leif Paulson, Sean Perley,
Fred Perret, Jonathan Phillips-Bradford, Spencer Reeve,
Corey Reid, Stephanie Rogers, Sergio Roma, Daniel Rocchi,
David Schokking, Devin Stinchcomb, Michael Shinall,
Steve Tassie, Matthew Tee, Lynette Terrill, Stephen Voland,
Peter Westergaard, Mark Whiting, James Wilkinson, Kevin
Wilson.
Publisher: David Preti
 2015 Guillotine Games and Studio McVey, all rights reserved. No part of
this product may be reproduced without specific permission. Blood Rage and
Guillotine Games logo are trademarks of Guillotine Games Ltd., Studio Mcvey
logo is trademark of Studio McVey Ltd.
CoolMiniOrNot, and the CoolMiniOrNot logo are trademarks of CMON
Productions Limited
Actual components may vary from those shown. Made in China.
THIS PRODUCT IS NOT A TOY. NOT INTENDED FOR USE OF PERSONS 13
YEARS OF AGE OR YOUNGER.

TABLE OF CONTENTS:
Credits 2
Introduction 3
Objective--------------------- 3
Game Components 4
Basic Concepts 6
Game Board-------------------- 6
Clan Sheet-------------------- 7
Figures ----------------------- 8
Cards ------------------------ 8
Setup 9
Prepare Your Clan-------------- 9
Prepare the Board-------------- 10
Prepare the Cards--------------- 10
Last Steps-------------------- 11
The Phases of Play 12
Gods' Gifts Phase--------------- 12
Act ion Phase------------------- 13
Invade 14
March 15
Upgrade 16
Quest 17
Pillage 17
Discard Phase ---------------- 20
Quest Phase------------------ 20
Ragnark Phase---------------- 22
Release Valhalla Phase--------- 22
End of an Age ---------------- 22
End of the Game 23
Rules Summary 24

OVERVIEW:
Odin All-Father, in his wisdom, always
knew Ragnark would come. He never
found a way to prevent the destruction of
Midgard. Lesser creatures can only cower
and wait for the end.
But not you. You are a Viking, leader of a
proud and ancient clan. Even in the face
of final doom for all the world, you will
command your warriors on the field of
battle, conquering and pillaging as you
were born to do. The gods are generous in
their twilight hours, bestowing gifts and
boons upon you. Even the most monstrous
creatures of Midgard seek to find glory in
the little time they have left, and so they
too may join you in your assault. You will
use everything you have left to earn your
place in Valhalla by besting all other clans,
achieving the last victory the world will
ever know.
Life is fleeting, but glory is eternal. Now is
the time for rage!

OBJECTIVE:
The goal of the game is to achieve the greatest amount of
glory before the world finally comes to its fiery end. You
gain glory through victory in battle, through pillaging,
accomplishing quests for the gods, and dying valiantly in
battle. The game progresses through three Ages, as Ragnark
slowly consumes the world. The player with the
most glory at the end is the winner.

COMPONENTS:
- 4 Glory Markers (1 per clan)
- 1 Saga Token
- 1 Doom Token
- 1 Game Board
- 1 Age Track Sheet
- 1 Valhalla Sheet
- 1 First Player Token
- 16 Clan Tokens (4 per clan)
- 8 Ragnark Tokens
- 9 Pillage Tokens
- 4 Clan Sheets
- 102 Cards (3 decks of 34)
- 10 Bear Clan Figures (8 Warriors, 1 Leader, 1 Ship)
- 9 Monster Figures
- 10 Wolf Clan Figures (8 Warriors, 1 Leader, 1 Ship)
- 10 Serpent Clan Figures (8 Warriors, 1 Leader, 1 Ship)
- 10 Raven Clan Figures - (8 Warriors, 1 Leader, 1 Ship)
- 8 Large Plastic Bases (2 per clan)
- 44 Small Plastic Bases (11 per clan)


GAME BOARD:
The Blood Rage game board is a map of the mythical terrain
around Yggdrasil, the great tree that binds the nine
worlds together. The land is divided into nine provinces.
The center province is Yggdrasil. There are eight outer
provinces around it, divided into three regions: Manheim,
Alfheim, and Jotunheim. Provinces that share a
border are considered adjacent (Yggdrasil is adjacent to
all the other provinces).
Each of the provinces has three to five villages. Each village
can hold a single plastic figure. Because of this, each province
can only have as many figures within its borders as it
has villages. Yggdrasil has no villages, and so there is no
limit to the number of figures that can occupy Yggdrasil.
In addition, there are four fjords situated between pairs of
outer provinces. Each fjord is said to be supporting the two
provinces that it is connected to. Any effect that affects a
province, also affects its supporting fjord. There is no limit
to the number of Ship figures that can occupy each fjord.
Finally, there is the Glory Track running around the
edge of the board to keep track of the players' scores.
Each player will move his clan's Glory marker along this
track whenever they gain more Glory.

BASIC CONCEPTS:
Each of the clans the players can choose to play as has
its own clan sheet in order to keep track of its resources,
stats and upgrades.
Across the middle of your clan sheet is your Rage Track.
Rage is your currency. When you take actions, it will
usually cost you some of your Rage. You will move your
clan token along this track to indicate how much Rage
you have left at the moment.
Below the Rage Track are your clan's stats. These are
Rage, Axes, and Horns.
The Rage stat tells you how much Rage you will have at
your disposal at the beginning of each round. With more
Rage, you can take more actions.
The Axes stat tells you how much Glory you gain for
winning battles. With more Axes, your victories in battle
will be more glorious, spurring your clan farther on your
path to victory.
The Horns stat tells you how many figures you can have
on the board at a time. With greater numbers, you can
fight more battles, pillage more lands and shed more
blood.
As the game goes on, you'll have several opportunities to
increase each of your clan's stats. Whenever one of your
stats is increased by one step, move the respective clan
token one slot to the right. If you're able to increase your
stats to legendary levels by the end of the game, you'll
gain powerful glory bonuses.
Each of your figures  Leader, Ship, Warriors, and eventually
Monsters  has a Strength rating (STR). At the
start of the game, these ratings are all shown on your
clan sheet: Leaders have STR 3, Ships have STR 2, and
Warriors have STR 1. Having plenty of strength on the
board will help you win battles and fulfill quests.
In addition, Leaders and Ships start the game with special
abilities, as detailed on the clan sheet.
As the game progresses, you may upgrade your figures
by placing Upgrade cards on the appropriate slot on your
clan sheet. These cards will tell you your figures' new
STR rating and abilities. Note that Leaders and Ships
still retain the abilities detailed on the clan sheet, even
if they are upgraded.
Whenever a figure is destroyed, be it in battle, victim of
a special ability, or by the inescapable doom of Ragnark,
it is placed on the Valhalla sheet that sits next to the
board. There it waits for the next Age to rejoin the battle.
Cards
Three decks of cards are included that represent the gifts
of the Norse gods. Each round of the game will introduce
a new deck. These gifts can help in a wide variety of ways.
Battle cards (red) add to your army's Strength in battle.
Quest cards (green) represent divine quests given to your
clan. If successful, they can grant you a lot of glory.
Upgrade cards (black) upgrade several aspects of your clan:
 Troop upgrades upgrade the strength and/or abilities
of your Warriors, Leader or Ship.
 Monster upgrades are unique mythological beings
you can recruit to join you in battle.
 Clan upgrades are upgrades for your clan as a
whole that offer a variety of different effects.

Prepare Your Clan
First, each player chooses one of the available clans to play,
by placing one of the Clan Sheets in front of them. At the
start of the game, all clans are equal, but they'll soon become
unique with each player's choice of upgrades.
Take your clan's Leader figure and 8 Warrior figures, and
make sure the small plastic bases in your clan's color are
attached to them. This helps easily distinguish your units
on the board. Take one Ship figure and make sure it's got
a sail attached in your clan's color. Keep all of your figures
near your clan sheet. This area is called your reserve.
Also keep your clan's extra 2 small bases and 2 large bases
next to you. They will be used if you recruit any Monsters.
Take your clan's Glory Marker and place it on the Glory
Track around the board, on the "0" spot.
Take all of your Clan Tokens, placing one of them on the
first spot of each of the three Clan Stats on your clan
sheet: Rage, Axes, and Horns. This means all players start
the game with the following stats: 6 Rage, 3 Axes, and 4
Horns. Finally take your last Clan token and place it on
the Rage Track on your clan sheet. Since your starting
Rage stat is 6, the token is placed on the "6" spot of your
Rage Track.

Prepare the Board
Next to the Game Board, place the Valhalla sheet and
the Age Track sheet.
Take all the Pillage tokens and place the one with the
green border on the Yggdrasil province at the center of
the board, with the reward side facing up. Shuffle the
other 8 Pillage tokens and place them randomly on the
other 8 provinces surrounding Yggdrasil, face up. The
Pillage tokens show the reward you get for pillaging that
province, as explained on page 18.
Take the 8 Ragnark tokens and shuffle them. Place one
on each of the three Ragnark spots on the Age Track.
The tokens should have the text side facing up, indicating
what provinces will be destroyed in the course of the
game.
As a constant reminder of which province is doomed to
be swallowed next by Ragnark, place the Doom token
on the province indicated by the Ragnark token on the
First Age track.
Before the game begins, some provinces will already have
been destroyed by Ragnark, leaving less usable space on
the board. Depending on the number of players in the
game, randomly take the number of Ragnark tokens indicated
below and place them on the provinces indicated
on them, with the "destroyed" side facing up.
 In a 4-player game, 1 province is destroyed.
 In a 3-player game, 2 provinces are destroyed.
 In a 2-player game, 3 provinces are destroyed.
The remaining Ragnark tokens are placed back in the
box. A province with a Ragnark token on it is effectively
out of the game. No figures can ever be placed in that
province.

GAME SETUP:
Prepare the Cards
Separate the cards by their card backs, creating three different
decks: 1, 2, and 3.
Depending on how many people are playing the game,
some cards may need to be removed from each deck to
make sure the game is balanced properly. The cards that
may need to be removed show on the left side a small
number, such as 3+, or 4+. This indicates that the card
should only be included when playing with the indicated
number of players or more.
 For a 4-player game, no cards are removed.
 For a 3-player game, all 4+ cards are removed.
 For a 2-player game, all 3+ and 4+ cards are removed.
Each deck contains eight 4+ cards and six 3+ cards. Any removed
cards are placed back in the game box. Then, shuffle
each of the three decks separately and place them, face
down, on the appropriate Gods' Gifts spots of the Age Track.
Last Steps
Place all Monster figures next to the board, within reach
of all players
Place the Saga token on the first spot of the First Age on
the Story Track. This is the "Gods' Gifts  Age 1" spot. The
Saga token will be moved from phase to phase of each
Age, one Age after the other, in order to help players keep
track as the game progresses.
Finally, give the First Player token to the player who
was born furthest to the north. That player will start
the game in the First Age. The First Player token will be
passed to the player to the left at the end of each Age.

Blood Rage is played over a series of three rounds, known
as Ages. Each Age is divided into six phases:
1. GODS' GIFTS
2. ACTION
3. DISCARD
4. QUEST
5. RAGNARK
6. RELEASE VALHALLA
The phases must be played in order, and a phase must be
completely finished before moving to the next one. Move
the Saga token on the Age Track from one phase to the
next as they are completed, to help keep track. Once the
last phase of an Age is done, the Saga token is moved to
the first phase of the next Age, until it reaches the end of
the Third Age and the game ends.
Gods' Gifts Phase
During this phase, players build a hand of cards in a process
called drafting. These cards will provide them with
upgrades for troops and clan, monsters to join the fight,
quests for glory, and the raw power to win battles.
On the Second and Third Age, if a player has a leftover
card in their hand from a previous Age, they must first
place this card face down on their clan sheet, on top of
their clan symbol.
Take the deck of cards from the Age Track of the current
Age and deal 8 cards to each player. The few remaining
cards won't be used in this game session.
Drafting works like this: Each player inspects the eight
cards dealt to them and selects one to keep, placing it
face down on their clan sheet, on top of the symbol of
their clan animal. Once everyone has placed a card on
their clan sheet, everyone passes the rest of their cards to
the player on their left.

FIRST GAME:
For your First Age, we recommend you simply play
with the 8 cards you're dealt, and don't draft. After
one Age, players should be familiar enough to draft
during the Second Age.

THE PHASES OF PLAY:
Now each player looks at the cards they've been passed,
selects one to keep, and places it face down on their
clan sheet. Then everyone passes their remaining cards
to the left.
Continue picking and passing cards until each player has
placed six new cards on their clan sheet. By that point, everyone
will have two cards left to pass. But instead of passing
them, they must be discarded without showing them.
At the end of this phase, all players should have 6 cards
in their hand, plus any card they might have saved from
a previous Age. Keep these cards secret from the other
players. You will be able to use these cards during the
Action phase.
Act ion Phase
This is the main part of the game, where invading and pillaging
takes place, battles are fought, and blood is spilled.
All players begin the Action phase with the amount of
Rage indicated by the Rage stat on their clan sheet. If
this is the first Age, you've already taken care of this by
placing your Clan token at 6 Rage during setup. In subsequent
Ages, if you have improved your clan's Rage stat,
you will begin the Action phase with more Rage.
Example: The Raven player has improved his Rage stat two
steps during the previous Age, so he begins the next Action
phase with 8 Rage.
The player with the First Player token will go first, and
play proceeds in clockwise order from there.
On your turn, you must choose a single action to perform.
If that action carries a cost in Rage (it usually does), you
must pay that cost and then take your action. Move the
token on you clan's Rage Track to indicate how much Rage
you've spent. If you do not have enough Rage to fully pay
for a particular action, you cannot take that action.
Once your action is complete, your turn ends. The player
to your left will then take their turn, performing a single
action and paying any Rage cost associated with it. Players
continue taking turns in order.
DRAFTING IN A 2-PLAYER GAME
Drafting is a little different in a 2-player game.
Players select 2 cards to keep (instead of 1), placing
them face down on their clan sheet, and pass the rest
to their opponent. This is done two more times until
each player has placed 6 cards on their clan sheet.
Then the remaining 2 cards are discarded.
STRATEGY TIPS FOR DRAFTING
Most cards are named after a specific god, with each
god providing a different kind of gift. If you stick mostly
to cards named after one or two gods, you should do
well. Here's what you can expect from each god:
Odin: Judgment and punishment in and out of battle.
Thor: Glory and spoils for victory in battle.
Loki: Revenge or spoils for defeat in battle.
Frigga: Resources and support.
Heimdall: Foresight and surprises.
Tyr: Great numbers for winning battles.
You generally should strive for a relative balance of
card types. Ignoring a card type completely (such as
Quests, Upgrades, or Battle Cards) won't make you
automatically lose, but it may cost you!
The Phases Of Play
A player who is down to zero Rage cannot perform any action
on their turn, not even an action that costs zero Rage.
All that player can do is react to other players' actions, such
as participating in a battle started by another player.
Players have five options to choose from when performing
an action (as indicated at the bottom of the clan
sheet). Players can take the same action several times
throughout an Action phase, always taking a single action
per turn.
If you cannot take an action, or do not wish to, you can
choose to pass. However, when you pass, you lose all your
remaining Rage and can take no further actions.
End of the Action Phase: The Action phase immediately
ends when either all players are down to zero Rage, or
all of the provinces that are not yet destroyed have been
successfully pillaged (even if players still have Rage left).
INVADE
Choose a single figure in your reserve and pay Rage equal
to that figure's STR. Take that figure from your reserve
and place it into any empty village in any outer province.
If the chosen figure is a Ship, it must be placed in any
fjord. You cannot use this action to place a figure directly
in Yggdrasil; to put your troops in Yggdrasil you'll have
to March them there. Also note that invading with your
Leader does not cost any Rage.
Example: The Raven player has upgraded his Warriors. Since
their STR is now 2, he pays 2 Rage in order to Invade the empty
Utgard village with 1 of the Warriors in his reserve.
Note: Always pay attention to your Horns stat. If the
number of your figures on the board is equal to your current
Horns stat, you cannot Invade with any more figures
(Valhalla is not part of the board).
 INVADE: Place a figure from your reserve onto an
empty village on the map.
 MARCH: Move the figures from one province to
empty villages in a different province.
 UPGRADE: Place a card from your hand on your
clan sheet to improve your abilities.
 QUEST: Commit to a quest by placing a Quest card
from your hand face down onto your clan sheet.
 PILLAGE: Attack a province and plunder its bounty
for your clan.
14 The Phases Of Play
MARCH
When you order your troops to March, you must pay 1
Rage. Choose one province (you cannot choose a fjord)
and move any number of your figures from that province
to empty villages in another single province. The destination
province doesn't have to be adjacent, it can be
anywhere on the board.
You cannot move figures from two different provinces in
the same action, nor move your figures to two different
provinces. You can only March from any one province to
any other.
Note: Using the March action is generally the only way
to get your figures to Yggdrasil. There are no villages in
Yggdrasil, so there is no limit to the number of figures
you can have there.
Example: The example below shows five different legal or illegal
March actions:
1: The blue player can move his 2 figures, even though the provinces
are not adjacent. He's unable to move all 3 of his figures
from Gimle because Elvagar only has 2 empty villages.
2: The yellow player can move all the figures he wants from
Angerboda to Yggdrasil. There's no limit to the number of figures
that can occupy Yggdrasil.
3: The brown player cannot move his figures into two different
provinces with a single March action.
4: The red player cannot move his figures from two different
provinces with a single March action.
5: Ships can never be moved.
The Phases Of Play 15
UPGRADE
Each clan sheet has slots for up to eight upgrades: one
each for your Warriors, Leader and Ship, two for Monsters,
and three for your Clan.
When you Upgrade, you must choose an Upgrade card
from your hand and pay Rage equal to that card's STR.
Then place the card in the appropriate slot on your clan
sheet. If there is more than one potential slot, you choose
which one to use. If there is already a card in that slot,
discard the old card and replace it with the new one. This
new Upgrade card is now in permanent effect, granting
you any benefits listed on it; from higher Strength for
your troops to special abilities.
If your clan has two Upgrades in different slots that give
you the same type of benefit, both cards take effect independently.
One does not cancel the other.
Example: In order to play the Loki's Eminence upgrade, the
Serpent player must pay Rage equal to its STR of 2. Since she
already has three Clan Upgrades on her clan sheet, she chooses to
discard Frigga's Succor to make space for the new upgrade. Her
clan now has both Loki's Domain and Loki's Emminence, giving
it a total of 3 Glory for each figure she releases from Valhalla!
TROOP UPGRADES
When you play a Leader, Warrior, or Ship upgrade, if
you have the corresponding figure in your reserve, you
may immediately (before the next player's turn) Invade
with it without spending any extra Rage.
MONSTER UPGRADES
Monsters are unique figures that can dramatically
change the course of the game. Each has a powerful and
unique special ability.
When you play a Monster upgrade, take the corresponding
Monster figure, attach your clan's base to it, and place
it in your reserve. It is now yours for the rest of the game,
counting as one of your figures. You may immediately
Invade with it without spending any extra Rage.
Your Monster can die and be sent to Valhalla like any
other figure, returning to your reserve in the next Release
Valhalla phase. It can gain Glory for you during the
Ragnark phase just like any other figure.
You can only have 2 Monsters as part of your clan at a
time. If you discard a Monster's card in order to place a
new Monster in its Upgrade slot, the old Monster figure
is immediately returned to the game box.
16 The Phases Of Play
QUEST
Take a Quest card from your hand and commit to it by
placing it face down on your clan sheet, on top of your
clan's animal symbol. It costs no Rage to commit to a
Quest. There is no limit to the number of Quests you can
commit to during each Age, and you may commit to two
Quests of the same type (each giving its reward independently).
You may inspect your own Quests at any time.
During this Action phase, you should try to fulfill the
demands of the Quests you commit to, reaping the rewards
listed on them during the next Quest phase (see
page 20). However, there's no penalty for failing a Quest.
Note: Even though it costs no Rage to commit to a Quest,
remember that you cannot take any actions if you're
down to zero Rage; not even a free one.
Example: The Bear player commits to the Jotunheim! Quest.
If during the next Quest phase he has the most STR in any of
the Jotunheim provinces, he'll gain 7 Glory and raise one of his
clan stats 1 step.
PILLAGE
If you successfully Pillage a province, you will gain a reward,
either by improving one of your clan stats, or by
gaining more glory. But first you will need to defeat in
battle any other clans occupying that province.
To Pillage, choose a province that has at least one of
your figures in it (or in a supporting fjord) and has not
yet been successfully pillaged this phase (its Pillage token
is showing the reward side up). It costs no Rage to
Pillage, but remember that you can't take any action if
you're down to zero Rage. A Pillaging action is resolved
by following 3 steps in order:
1. CALL TO BATTLE
Once you have declared your intent to Pillage that province,
the other players have a chance to join the battle.
Starting with the player to your left and going around in
clockwise order, each player (including you) may, if they
wish, move one of their figures from an adjacent province
into an empty village in the province you are pillaging.
Moving a figure in this way does not cost Rage, and even
players with zero Rage can do it. (Note that Ships cannot
be moved.) Once all villages in that province are occupied,
or when no one else wishes to join in, the battle begins.
Note: There are no villages in Yggdrasil, so any number of
figures can join a battle there.
If at this point there are no enemy figures in the province
or its supporting fjord, no battle takes place and you automatically
Pillage the province, gaining its reward (see
next page) and flipping its Pillage token to its "pillaged"
side. Note that in this case you don't gain any Glory for
winning battles.
Otherwise, a battle will take place, and all figures in the
province being pillaged, or its supporting fjord, must
participate in it.
1. Call to Battle: Players may move adjacent figures
to join the battle.
2. Play Cards: Players in the battle reveal cards to
add STR and/or special effects.
3. Resolution: Highest STR determines the winner.
Losers are destroyed, winner gets rewards.
The Phases Of Play 17
2. PLAY CARDS
Each player participating in the battle must choose one
card from their hand and hold it face down in front of
them (unless they have no cards left in their hand; in that
case they don't have to put a card in). Then they all reveal
their chosen card simultaneously.
If you reveal a Battle card, its +STR bonus will be added to
the total STR of your figures in the battle. Also, any special
abilities listed on the card takes effect at this point.
If, however, you reveal an Upgrade or Quest card, it adds
nothing to your Strength in battle and has no effect.
Each clan adds together the STR of each of its involved figures,
and adds the +STR bonus offered by their played Battle
card (if any). This is their clan's total STR in that battle.
Note: If a card's special effect causes a player to lose all
the figures he had in the battle before comparing STR,
that does not mean that clan is out of the battle. The figures
were destroyed in the course of battle, and the clan
might still emerge victorious if its played Battle card has
enough STR.
3. RESOLUTION
The player with the highest STR total wins the battle! In
case of a tie, all participating players lose the battle.
The winner of the battle (if any) must discard all cards
he played. The losers of the battle take all of their played
cards back into their hands.
All losing players must destroy all of their figures that
were in the battle (including those that were supporting
from fjords), placing them on the Valhalla sheet.
If the player who initiated the Pillage wins the battle,
they have successfully pillaged the province and gain the
Pillage Reward indicated in the Pillage token (see below).
Flip the token to its "pillaged" side to indicate that the
province cannot be pillaged again until the next Age.
If the pillaging player does not win the battle, the province
is not pillaged and nobody gets the Pillage Reward.
Any player (including the pillager) can try again later in
the phase to pillage the province.
Finally, the winner of the battle gains Battle Glory,
whether he's the pillaging player or not. The number of
Glory points they get is equal to their current Axes stat,
as indicated on their clan sheet.
Some special Battle
cards can be used to
further increase the
Strength of your troops
even after players have
revealed their cards.
These special cards
have their STR bonus
on a solid white disc,
and they indicate in the
card text that they can
be played after cards
are revealed but before
determining a winner
(they can also be
played normally). The
pillaging player has the
first chance to add Strength from one of these special
cards, and it proceeds clockwise around the table
from there until nobody wants to play any.
PILLAGE REWARDS
When you successfully Pillage this
province, increase your clan's Rage
stat one step. You do not gain additional
Rage during this phase, but you
will start with more in the next Age.
When you successfully Pillage this
province, increase your clan's Axes
stat one step. The increased Glory for
victory in battle takes effect immediately
and includes this battle.
When you successfully Pillage this
province, increase your clan's Horns
stat one step.
When you successfully Pillage this
province, gain 5 Glory.
When you successfully Pillage Yggdrasil,
increase all three of your clan
stats one step.
The Phases Of Play
3. Both of blue's Warriors die and are sent to
Valhalla, but the blue player keeps his Upgrade
card and returns it to his hand. Red
pillages Andlang, flips the pillage token face
down on the board, and increases her clan stat
for Axes by one step, raising its value from
3 to 4. She then gains 4 Glory for her battle
victory and discards her played battle card.
Example:
1. The Wolf clan player (red) chooses to Pillage
Andlang. She can do this despite not having any
figures in Andlang, because her Ship is in the supporting
fjord. The Raven clan player (blue), seated to
her left, moves his Warrior from Gimle to an empty
village in Andlang. The Serpent clan player (yellow)
would love to join this battle by moving her Leader
from Horgr to Andlang, since Horgr has already been
pillaged, but Horgr is not adjacent, so she can't. The
red player moves a Warrior from Yggdrasil to one of
the empty villages in Andlang, then the blue player
moves a Warrior from Yggdrasil, taking the last
empty village in Andlang. The red player would really
like to move another Warrior in from Yggdrasil, but
there are no empty villages left in Andlang.
The red and blue players are the only ones with any
presence in Andlang, so they will be the only ones
fighting. Red has a total Strength of 3 (2 for the Ship
and 1 for the Warrior) while blue has a total Strength
of 2 (2 Warriors, each with 1 STR). They select their
cards, place them on the table, then reveal them.
2. Red reveals Tyr's Crush, a battle card with a
value of +4. But blue had no intention of winning,
and simply reveals an Upgrade card, adding
nothing to his Strength. Red ends up with a
Strength of 7 (3+4), and blue with 2 (2+0). Red
wins the battle.
The Phases Of Play 19
Discard Phase
Players can only keep a single card (if they have any left)
to carry over to the next Age. All players must discard
down to one card.
In the Third Age players should discard all cards, completely
emptying their hands.
Quest Phase
Each player reveals all Quests they have committed to.
If you have fulfilled a Quest's requirements, you gain
the amount of Glory indicated on the card, and may also
raise any one of your clan stats one step. If you fail to fulfill
a Quest, you get nothing, but you also lose nothing.
Discard all revealed Quests, whether successful or not.
Most Quests involve having
the most Strength in
any one of the provinces
of a particular region. Add
together the STR of each of
your figures in that province
(including the supporting
fjord) and compare
your total to the total STR
of each other clan in that
same province. If your total
is greater, you fulfill the
Quest. If you tie with an enemy,
you fail the Quest.
Example: The Serpent player
(yellow) reveals she has
committed to the Manheim!
Quest. She'll succeed if she has
the most STR in any province
of the Manheim region. In
Elvagar the red player has
three STR 1 Warriors, for a total
of STR 3, while the yellow
player also has a total of STR 3
due to her STR 1 Warrior and
STR 2 Ship in the supporting
fjord. Since it's a tie, Elvagar
does not grant the Serpent
player the Quest.
However, her STR 2 Ship is also
supporting Angerboda, where
the blue player has only a STR
1 Warrior. With this the Quest
succeeds and the Serpent clan
gets the 5 Glory listed on the
Quest cards and the player decides
to raise her Horns stat
one step.
20 The Phases Of Play
The Phases Of Play 21
Ragnark Phase
Take the token that's on the current Ragnark slot and
place it on its corresponding province, with the "destroyed"
side facing up. That province is destroyed forever
and is out of the game.
There can be no more glorious death to a Viking than to
be destroyed in Ragnark. When a province is destroyed
this way, all figures in that province, and in its supporting
fjord, die and are placed in Valhalla. Each such figure
earns its clan some Glory. The amount of Glory granted
is indicated on each Ragnark slot on the Age Track. For
each of their figures (including Monsters) destroyed in
Ragnark, the players gain 2 Glory in the First Age, 3 Glory
in the Second Age, and 4 Glory in the Third Age.
Next, place the Doom token on the province indicated by
the next Age's Ragnark token.
Release Valhalla Phase
At the end of each Age, all figures in Valhalla are returned
to their respective owners. Move all figures on
the Valhalla sheet belonging to your clan back to your
reserve. Any figures on the game board remain there.
End of an Age
Before moving on to the next Age, flip
all Pillage tokens on the board back to
their "reward" side. These tokens are
not reshuffled; they stay on the same
province throughout the game.
The First Player token is passed to the
player to the left.
Then, move the Saga token down to
the first phase of the next Age on the
Age Track. A new Age will then begin
with a new set of Gods' Gifts. With
each new Age, those gifts will grow in
strength and power, offering greater
glory, and leading to greater clashes on
the board over less and less remaining
territory as Ragnark continues to destroy
the land.
Example: The Ragnark token indicates Gimle, so it's taken
from the Age Track, flipped and placed on the Gimle province
on the board, destroying it. All figures in that province and
supporting fjord are destroyed and placed in Valhalla. Two red
figures and two blue figures are destroyed. Since the Age Track
indicated a 3 Glory reward this Ragnark phase, each player
gains 6 Glory. The Doom token is then moved to the province
indicated in the next Ragnark phase: Andlang.
22 The Phases Of Play
Once the Release Valhalla phase of the Third Age is completed,
the world has come to an end, and so has the game.
It is now time to see what clan has gained the most glory
and earned its place in Valhalla next to Odin's throne!
There is one last bonus to tally, though. Players gain a
Glory bonus for increasing each of their clan's stats to
legendary levels. At the end of the game only, for each of
your clan stats that has been increased to the 4th or 5th
step, gain +10 Glory. For each of your clan stats that has
been increased to the last step, gain +20 Glory.
Example: The Raven player has managed to raise two of his
clan stats to legendary levels. At the end of the game he gains
+10 Glory for Rage and +20 Glory for Axes, for a total of +30
Glory.
The player whose clan has the most Glory is then declared
the winner!

PLAY TIPS:
Blood Rage is not just a simple area control game.
While winning battles can certainly be a path to victory,
you can sometimes gain a great deal by dying.
In a suicidal battle, you can gain glory as your troops
are sent to Valhalla. And at the same time you deplete
cards from the hand of the winner, weakening
them for future battles.
Quests can score huge amounts of glory. They're much
too powerful to ignore. But if you collect too many
of them, you may be too weak to accomplish them.
You need to strike a balance. It's also important to
watch the other players as they invade and pillage. If
you can figure out which quests they are committed
to, you have a much better chance of stopping them
from completing those quests.

RULES SUMMARY:
The Phases of each Age
1. GODS' GIFTS
Deal 8 cards to each player. Draft until each player has
6 cards. Discard remaining 2 cards.
2. ACTION
Set Rage to clan's current Rage stat.
Take turns performing 1 action at a time, paying the
Rage cost associated to each action.
Players with 0 Rage cannot take any action.
Continue until all players have 0 Rage or all provinces
are pillaged.
INVADE
Pay Rage equal to a figure's STR to move it from your
reserve onto an empty village.
Can't Invade Yggdrasil. Ships can only Invade fjords.
Leaders Invade for free.
MARCH
Pay 1 Rage to move any of your figures from one province
to empty villages in one other province.
Ships can't March.
UPGRADE
Pay Rage equal to the STR of an Upgrade card in your
hand to place it on your clan sheet.
If you Upgrade a figure, you may immediately Invade
with it for free.
QUEST
At no Rage cost, place a Quest card from your hand
face down on your clan sheet, committing to it.
PILLAGE
At no Rage cost, choose an un-pillaged province with
at least one of your figures in it (or in a supporting
fjord) to attempt to pillage it.
Starting with the player to the left, players may move
for free figures from adjacent provinces into empty
villages of the province being pillaged.
All players with figures in the battle choose and reveal
one card. Add your card STR bonus to your figures total
STR. Highest total wins the battle. On a tie all participants
lose the battle.
All losing players return all played cards to their
hands. All of their participating figures are destroyed
and go to Valhalla.
If pillaging player wins, gain Pillage Reward and flip
Pillage token.
Winning player gains Battle Glory equal to his Axes
stat and discards all played cards.
3. DISCARD
Players discard their hands down to 1 card.
4. QUEST
Reveal and discard all played Quest cards, gaining rewards
for completed Quests.
5. RAGNARK
Destroy current doomed province. All figures in it and
in its supporting fjord are destroyed and go to Valhalla.
Gain the amount of Glory indicated on the Age Track
for each of your figures destroyed.
Move Doom token to the next doomed province.
6. RELEASE VALHALLA
Return all figures in Valhalla to their owner's reserve.
End of an Age
Flip all Pillage tokens up. Pass First Player token to the
left.
END OF THE GAME:
Gain the indicated Glory bonus for each of your clan
stats at legendary levels.
Player with the most Glory wins.



GAME NAME:
Betrayal at House on the Hill

30017607000001 EN
>>>>>>> 9317a591a638881b40891451c9d95f5ab7729b56
QUESTIONS?
U.S., Canada, Asia Pacifi c
& Latin America:
Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
custserv@wizards.com
P.O. Box 707,
Renton WA 98057-0707,
U.S.A.
1-800-324-6496 (within the U.S.)
1-206-624-0933 (outside the U.S.)
U.K., Eire & South Africa:
Wizards of the Coast, Inc.,
Consumer Affairs
wizards@hasbro.co.uk
P.O. Box 43
Caswell Way
Newport NP19 4YD
GREAT BRITAIN
tel: 00 800 22 427276
All Other European Countries:
Wizards of the Coast
custserv@hasbro.co.uk
p/a Hasbro Belgium
Hofveld 6D
B-1702 Groot-Bijgaarden
BELGIUM
+32.70.233.277
2004 Wizards of the Coast Inc./Hasbro, Inc.
All Rights Reserved
Design: Bruce Glassco with contributions from Rob Daviau
Development: Mike Selinker (lead), Bill McQuillan, Brian "Chainsaw" Campbell,
Mons Johnson, Gwendolyn F.M. Kestrel, Bill Slavicsek, Brian Tinsman, and
Teeuwynn Woodruff
Fiction Team: Teeuwynn Woodruff (lead) with Bruce Cordell
Editors: Brian Campbell and Cal Moore
Art Director: Peter Whitley
Graphic Design: Kate Irwin (lead), Rob Daviau, and Trish Yochum
Production Management: Kay McKee and Teresa Newby
Cover Illustrator: Christopher Moeller
Tile Illustrator: Scott Okumura
Brand Lead: Laura Veasey
Lead Playtester: Warren Wyman
Thanks to The Beach Trip Gang and The Hasbro Games Group, especially the
Games Interns, The Wizards Playtesters, Aaron Alberg, Mary-Elizabeth Allen, Paul
Bazakas, Kay Bean, Tyler Bielman, Carrie Clayburn, Michael Cooper, Martin Durham,
Lisa Glassco, Rick Glassco, Mike Gray, Brian Hart, Mary Kirchoff, Scott Larabee, Faith
Price, Bill Rose, Kate Ross, Patrick Ross, Liz Schuh, and Anthony Valterra.
House on the Hill, Avalon Hill, and their logos are trademarks of Hasbro, Inc.  denotes Reg. U.S. Pat. &
TM Offi ce. All rights reserved. 2004 Hasbro. Manufactured and distributed by Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
Wizards of the Coast and its logo are trademarks of Wizards in the U.S.A. and other countries. 2004
Wizards. Rulebooks printed in the U.S.A.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Game Overview......................................................................................... 2
Game Components ................................................................................... 2
Object of the Game ................................................................................... 2
Setup ........................................................................................................... 2
On Your Turn
Moving .............................................................................................. 4
Discovering a New Room ............................................................... 4
Drawing Omen, Item, and Event Cards ....................................... 5
Using Item and Omen Cards .......................................................... 7
Attempting a Die Roll ..................................................................... 7
Making an Attack ............................................................................ 8
The Haunt
Making a Haunt Roll ....................................................................... 9
Revealing the Haunt ..................................................................... 10
Haunt Setup ................................................................................... 11
Haunt Turn Order .......................................................................... 11
The Traitor's New Powers ................................................................... 12
How Monsters Work .............................................................................. 12
Winning the Game.................................................................................. 13
SIDEBARS
Special Rooms ............................................................................................. 6
Special Attacks ............................................................................................ 9
Optional Rule: Selecting the Haunt ........................................................ 11
Moving Past Opponents ........................................................................... 12
What Happens to My Stuff If I Die? ........................................................ 12
Heroes and Secrets ................................................................................... 13
What If There Isn't a Rule for That?
Many hours went into playtesting this game, but it's still possible you'll
run into situations where the game rules or haunt books don't clearly
answer a question about game play. Don't let that slow you down. In such
cases, come to an agreement as a group for what makes the most sense
and go with it. (If that doesn't work, fl ip a coin to decide.) Then continue
your experience in the house.
room tile stack 3 card stacks: omen, item, event
character cards
w/clips
starting
tiles:
Upper
Landing,
Basement
Landing
starting tile: Entrance Hall w/ 8 dice
3 plastic figures

GAME OVERVIEW:
In Betrayal at House on the Hill, each player chooses a character to explore a creepy old
house. As you explore the house, you discover new rooms. Each time you enter a new room,
you might fi nd something . . . or something might fi nd you. Explorers get better (or worse)
depending on how they deal with the house's surprises. The house is different each time
you build it.
At some random point during the game, one explorer triggers a scenario called a haunt.
When the haunt is revealed, one explorer betrays everyone else. That explorer becomes
a traitor bent on defeating his former companions. The rest of the explorers become
heroes struggling to survive. From then on, the game is a fight between the traitor and
the heroes . . . often a fight to the death.
This game has 50 haunts, and each one tells a different story. Each one of them is yours
to explore as you live or die in the House on the Hill.

GAME COMPONENTS:
- 1 rulebook
- 2 haunt books (Traitor's Tome and Secrets of Survival)
- 44 room tiles
- 1 Entrance Hall tile (3 rooms)
- 6 plastic character figures
- 6 two-sided character cards
- 30 plastic clips
- 8 dice
- 1 Turn/Damage Track
- 13 omen cards
- 22 item cards
- 45 event cards
- 291 tokens, including:
- 12 large circular monster tokens (includes art)
- 204 circular monster tokens
- 14 square event and room tokens
- 43 pentagonal item tokens
- 18 triangular trait roll tokens

OBJECT OF THE GAME:
Explore the house and make your character stronger until
the "haunt" scenario begins. After that, your goal is to
complete your side's victory condition fi rst, either as a traitor
or a hero.

SETUP:
 Set aside the Traitor's Tome and Secrets of
Survival haunt books. You'll use them after the
haunt is revealed.
 Each player chooses a character card. There's a
different explorer on each side of a character card.
Pick one.
 Attach 4 plastic clips to your explorer card. Each
one should point to one of the explorer's GREEN
starting numbers for his or her Speed, Might,
Knowledge, and Sanity.
 Shuffle a stack of omen cards and put it facedown
where everyone can reach it. Do the same with the
item cards and the event cards.
 Find the Basement Landing, Entrance Hall/Foyer/
Grand Staircase, and Upper Landing room tiles.
Place them from left to right reasonably far apart.
 Mix all of the rest of the room tiles together and
put them facedown in a stack. (Don't worry about
which floor is shown on the back of the tiles.)
 Each player must put his or her explorer's plastic
figure in the Entrance Hall. (Each explorer's figure
matches the color behind an explorer's picture on his
or her character card.)
 Put the dice in a pile within easy reach. You'll need
them throughout the game.
 See who goes first. The explorer who has the next
birthday goes first. (Look on your explorer's character
card to see his or her birthday.) Players take turns
clockwise following the first explorer.


HOW TO PLAY:
Starting with the first player and going clockwise, each player takes a turn exploring
the house.

ON YOUR TURN:
 you can do as many of the following actions as you want, in any order:
 You can move.
 You can discover a new room.
 You can attempt a die roll.
 You can use items or omen cards.
 You can attack (once during your turn after the haunt starts).
Before the haunt starts, you must make a haunt roll at the end of your turn if you draw an
omen card (see "Making a Haunt Roll"). The game has a few new twists after the haunt
starts (as described in "The Haunt").

MOVING:
On your explorer's turn, you can move up to number of spaces equal to your character's
current Speed. Whenever a game effect makes you draw a card, you must STOP moving for
the rest of your turn.

DISCOVERING A NEW ROOM:
When your explorer enters a doorway, and there isn't a room on the other side, look at the
top tile on the room stack. If it has the name of the floor you are on (ground floor, basement,
or upper floor), turn it over and connect it to the doorway you just entered. Then move
into that room. Add each new tile as logically as you can, creating adjacent rooms with
connecting doors. (Connect doorways whenever possible.)
If the top tile can't go on the floor you're currently on, set
it aside facedown in a discard pile. Keep setting tiles aside
until you fi nd one that works on your floor. (Some tiles work
on more than one floor.)
An explorer can move through a door if it connects to
another door in an adjacent room. Doors are always open.
The one exception is the front door. It's always locked. You
can't leave the house or use the front door unless a haunt
says otherwise. (Outside rooms like the Patio are still part of
the house.)
Staircases connect floors. The Grand Staircase always connects to the Upper Landing. The
Stairs from Basement always lead to and from the Foyer through a secret door. (You can't
use the Stairs from Basement until you discover that room in the basement.)
Some rooms also have rules on them, which apply to your explorer each time you enter the
room. Some rooms affect movement. A few rooms are clarified in the "Special Rooms" sidebar.
What happens if we get to the end
of the stack of room tiles?
If you go through the whole stack
of room tiles, shuffle the tiles you
set aside in a discard pile, and then
continue with the new stack. If you
run out of room tiles for one of the
floors of the house (the basement,
ground floor, or upper level), you
can't discover any more rooms on
that floor  you've found them all.
In this example, if your explorer has a Speed of 3,
you can move from the Entrance Hall to the Foyer,
then from the Foyer to the Kitchen, and then to the
Dining Room. If you're feeling more adventurous, you
could go through one of the empty doorways in the
Entrance Hall or Foyer and discover a new room. If
the new room you fi nd doesn't require you to draw a
card, you can keep going . . . but if it does, you have
to stop.

DRAWING OMEN, ITEM, AND EVENT CARDS:
A room may have a card symbol on it. The
first time you discover a room with a card symbol, you must
end your move in that room and draw the appropriate card.
If the room has a spiral symbol , draw an event
card. Read it out loud. Follow its instructions, which
may require you to attempt rolls. Then discard the card
unless it says otherwise or has an ongoing effect.
If the room has a bull's head symbol , draw an item
card. Read it out loud. Place it face up in front of you;
you now have it in your possession. You may use it once
immediately and once on each of your turns, unless it
says otherwise.
If the room has a raven symbol , draw an omen
card. Read it out loud. Place it face up in front of you;
you now have it in your possession. You might have to
do something immediately. At the end of your turn, you
must make a haunt roll. (See "Making a Haunt Roll.")
Entrance Hall
Foyer
Kitchen
Dining Room
< Explorer card
highlighting the 4
traits here.>>

USING ITEM AND OMEN CARDS:
You can use an item once at any point during your turn. Most
omen cards (except the Bite card) are also items you keep,
and they're used like other items.
Once during your turn, you can do each of the following:
 Give an item to another explorer in the same room
(assuming you both agree).
 Drop any number of items. (If you do, put an Item
Pile token in that room.) Another explorer (or you, for
that matter) can later pick up some or all of the items
in the pile, removing the token if all of the items are
picked up.
 Pick up one or more items from a pile of items.
Some items, like the Armor, can't be traded, but they can be
dropped or picked up.
Some omens, like the Dog, aren't items at all, so they can't
be dropped or traded. They're companions that follow
the explorer who has custody of them. (The Dog, Girl, and
Madman all work this way.)

SPECIAL ROOMS:
Many room tiles have rules printed on them, but some of them
also have special rules, listed here.
The Entrance Hall: The Entrance Hall, Foyer, and Grand
Staircase are all on the same room tile, but they count as three
separate rooms.

THE MYSTIC ELEVATOR:
This tile moves as soon as you enter it. Roll 2 dice and put it
adjacent to a connecting door on the appropriate floor. (If there
isn't one, leave the Mystic Elevator where it is.) If you roll the
same floor, you can move the elevator to a different connecting
door on your floor. You can use the elevator only once a turn.

THE COAL CHUTE:
Entering the Coal Chute and moving to the Basement Landing
counts as one space of movement. A turn can't end with an
explorer or monster on the Coal Chute space. (That figure will
always slide down to the Basement Landing.)

THE VAULT:
Once the Vault has been opened, put the Vault Empty token
on it.

THE COLLAPSED ROOM:
Only the explorer who first discovers the Collapsed Room needs
to make the Speed roll listed there. Thereafter, any explorer
entering the room can either ignore the room ability or use it
intentionally, in which case that explorer still takes the damage.
Falling to the basement doesn't count as moving a space.
Only the fi rst explorer to fall to the basement from the Collaped
Room draws and places a basement tile. Put the Below
Collapsed Room token on the room where the first person
landed.

THE CRYPT:
Monsters ignore this room's special rules.

THE FURNACE ROOM:
Monsters ignore this room's special rules.

THE CHASM, CATACOMBS, VAULT, AND TOWER:
These are all barrier rooms. A barrier can stop you from moving
to the other side of the room. Crossing a barrier requires a
trait roll listed on the room tile (either Might, Speed, Sanity, or
Knowledge). You can attempt this roll once during your turn.
Crossing the barrier doesn't count as moving a space. If you fail
the roll, you can't cross the barrier, though you can still move
back the way you came. Monsters always ignore barriers.
What happens if the
rules in the book and the
rules on a card conflict?
If this happens, use the
rules on the card.

ATTEMPTING A DIE ROLL:
Many times during the game,
you'll need to roll dice. For
instance, you might need to
roll dice for a card you've
drawn or when your explorer
moves onto a room tile.
If a card tells you to roll a
specific number of dice, do
so and add the number of
dots on each die to get the
result of the die roll. Then
do what the card says for
that result.
Sometimes a card or room
tile tells you to attempt
a roll based on one of
your explorer's traits
(Speed, Might, Sanity, or
Knowledge). When that
happens, roll as many dice
as your explorer currently
has in that trait. For
example, if your explorer
must attempt a Sanity roll,
and she currently has a
Sanity of 4, roll 4 dice and
add the dots together to
get the result. Whether you
succeed or fail, the card or
tile will tell you the results
of your attempt.

MAKING AN ATTACK:
Once during your turn, you can attack an opponent in the same room. You can't attack
anyone until after the haunt starts.
When you make an attack, roll a number of dice equal to your Might. Your opponent does
the same. Whoever rolls a higher result inflicts physical damage to the other explorer
or monster. That player defeats his or her opponent. The amount of damage equals the
difference between the two rolls. (For example, if you roll a 6 and your opponent gets a 5,
you would inflict 1 point of physical damage.) If there's a tie, no one gets hurt.
When you take physical damage, you lower your explorer's Might and/or Speed traits a total
number of spaces equal to the amount of damage you took.
Once the haunt begins, if any of your traits (Speed, Might, Sanity, or Knowledge) moves
down to the skull symbol , your explorer dies. Before the haunt starts, no one can diethat
is, no trait can go below the lowest number on the list (it stays at the lowest value instead).
Sometimes a card or a haunt lets you make an attack with a trait other than Might. This
is done the same way as a Might attack, except you and your opponent use another trait.
For example, if you make a Speed attack, you and your opponent roll dice based on Speed.
Speed attacks inflict physical damage like Might attacks.
When a card or a haunt lets you attack with Sanity or Knowledge, then you infl ict mental
damage. You and your opponent move down your Sanity and/or Knowledge traits.
You can't use a trait to attack an opponent who doesn't have that trait. For instance, if a
monster doesn't have Sanity, you can't make a Sanity attack against it.
Sometimes when you attack, you do something other than damage your opponent. For
instance, you may be able to steal an item (see "Special Attacks").
Monsters are only stunned when you defeat them, unless a haunt specifies otherwise.

THE HAUNT:
Making a Haunt Roll
Before the haunt starts, you must roll 6 dice at the end of
your turn each time you draw an omen card. This is called a
haunt roll. If you roll less than the total number of omen
cards all players have drawn this game, the haunt starts.
The player who starts the haunt with this roll is called the
haunt revealer.
For example, if you draw an omen card on your turn, and the
players have already drawn a total of 4 omen cards during
the game, you need a result of 4 or less on your haunt roll to
start the haunt.
Special Attacks
Distance attacks: The Revolver allows you to attack
someone in a room within your line of sight path that
leads through an uninterrupted straight line of doors. You
take no damage if the subject of your distance attack defeats
you. Some monsters can also make distance attacks.
Stealing items: If you attack someone and inflict 2 or
more points of physical damage, you can steal a tradable
item instead of doing the damage. You can't do this with a
distance attack.
Example of Taking Damage
Let's say your explorer,
Jenny LeClerc, just attacked
a Werewolf. She has a Might
of 4, so you roll 4 dice for
her attack. You get a 5 on
your attack roll. Then traitor
rolls an 8 for the Werewolf!
Jenny then has to take 3
points of physical damage.
You choose to lower her
Might 2 spaces and her
Speed down 1 space (by
sliding the plastic clips to
the new numbers). Jenny's
still alive, but she's hurt!

HAUNT SETUP:
Do the following at the start of the haunt:
 The traitor takes the Traitor's Tome and leaves the
room. The traitor reads only the haunt that is
starting now.
 The rest of the players become heroes. They look
up the haunt with the same number in Secrets of
Survival and read it together. (The heroes should also
talk briefly about their plan for survival.)
 When everyone is ready (including the traitor), the
traitor returns to the room. Both sides (the heroes and
the traitor) do anything the haunt told them to do
in the Right Now section. (For example, sometimes
you'll have to put tokens in the house or draw cards.)
Haunt Turn Order
The first turn always starts with the player to the traitor's
left and goes clockwise (further away from the traitor). Each
of the heroes gets a hero turn. After each hero has had a
turn, the traitor gets his or her traitor turn. After the traitor's
turn, any monsters controlled by the traitor get a monster
turn. (One player gets two turns: one for the traitor and one
for the monsters.) Then the first hero to the left of the traitor
goes, and so on.
The heroes and traitor are all still explorers. They can do
the same things they did before the haunt was revealed,
except they don't have to attempt further haunt rolls (even
if one of them gets an omen card). The traitor has to tell the
heroes what he or she is doing each turn, but not why; the
same condition applies to the heroes.
After the haunt begins, explorers can die. If one of your
explorer's 4 traits moves down to a skull , then that
explorer dies. Sometimes during a haunt, a hero will actually
become a traitor when he or she "dies."
Sometimes the traitor is transformed or otherwise disposed
of at the start of the haunt, but the traitor still gets a turn
after all the heroes do. Even if the traitor dies, as long as the
monsters can complete the haunt's goals, the monsters still
get their turn (and the traitor controls them).

Optional Rule: Selecting
the Haunt
If you consult the chart
and get a haunt you've
used already, and you
don't want to do it again,
look for the next room
with an omen symbol
closest to the revealer
of the haunt. Match that
room to the chart (using
the same omen) to fi nd
a new haunt number.
Continue going from room
to room this way until
you fi nd a haunt that you
haven't revealed. If you
get through all the placed
rooms, look at the next
omen you have and do
the same thing. With this
optional rule, you can play
through all of the haunts
without repeating ones
you've already played.
Revealing the Haunt
When a player makes a haunt roll and starts the haunt, that
player looks on the inside front cover of Secrets of Survival
or the Traitor's Tome. A haunt chart on that page shows
which haunt has been revealed...and who is the traitor.
The chart on the inside cover has a list of omen cards (across
the top of the chart) and a list of rooms (along the side of the
chart). Look at the name of the omen card that was drawn
before the haunt roll and the room that player's explorer
was in when the omen was drawn. Find the corresponding
haunt number. This is the haunt you're going to play.
When you fi nd out who the traitor is, give the Traitor's
Tome to that player. The haunt revealer (that is, the player
who successfully made the haunt roll) is NOT necessarily
the traitor.
Special Cases: If two or more people could be the traitor,
and one of them is the haunt revealer, then that person is
the traitor. If neither one was the haunt revealer, then the
closest player on the haunter revealer's left is the traitor.
For example, if the haunt revealer had the Girl omen card, and her explorer was in the
Catacombs, you would be playing Haunt #1, "The Mummy Walks."

HEROES AND SECRETS:
Don't tell the traitor what your goals are, unless you're sure the traitor already knows them
or you're doing something as part of the haunt. Sometimes you have an advantage over the
traitor because that player doesn't know what you're trying to do. You can still play these
haunts again and again after you know how they work, but until then, the heroes shouldn't
disclose the Secrets of Survival for their haunt.

THE TRAITOR'S NEW POWERS:
When your explorer becomes a traitor, you can use the
following abilities (unless a haunt says otherwise):
 You can use or ignore any non-damaging room effects
or cards you draw. You can walk across the Chasm,
decide where the Mystic Elevator goes, leave the
Junk Room without rolling, and so on.
 You can choose not to be affected by an event card. If
you choose to be affected by one, though, you have to
accept any rolls or penalties.
 After you finish your turn, you move and attack with
all of the monsters, if any. Even if the traitor dies,
you still control the monsters. In some haunts, the
monsters are still able to complete a haunt's goals
after the traitor is dead.
What happens to my stuff
if I die?
If you die and you have a
companion (the Dog, the
Girl, or the Madman), its
token stays in the room
where you died. Set aside
that omen card. If another
explorer enters the room, he
or she gains custody of that
companion (and takes that
omen card). When you die,
any other items you have
drop to the fl oor. Put an Item
Pile token there and set
aside those item or omen
cards. Other players can
go to the room to pick up
your items (and take those
cards).
Moving Past Opponents
For each opponent in a
room with you after the
haunt starts, an explorer
must use one extra space
of movement to leave
that room. An opponent
is an explorer or monster
that wants to stop your
movement. No matter how
many penalties you have on
a turn, you can always move
at least one space.
Stunned monsters don't slow
an explorer's movement in
this way.
What happens if a haunt's
rules and the regular rules
conflict?
If this happens, use the rules
in the haunt. All of these
rules are in effect unless a
haunt says otherwise.

HOW MONSTERS WORK:
Monsters behave a little differently than explorers do. All
of the following rules are in effect unless a haunt says
otherwise.
 Monsters move differently. At the start of the
monster turn, roll a number of dice equal to each
monster's Speed. That's the number of spaces that
monster can move that turn. For groups of the same
type of monster (Bats or Zombies, for instance), just
roll once for the whole group. Each monster of that
type can then move that many spaces that turn.
 Most monsters can't be killed. If a monster suffers
any damage, it is stunned and misses its next turn.
When a monster is stunned, flip its token over. At the
end of the monster's next turn, flip it back. Stunned
monsters can't slow an explorer's movement.
 Like explorers, a monster can attack only once
during its turn. Monsters often use traits other
than Might to attack. They can't make any of the
Special Attacks on page 9 (again, unless a haunt says
otherwise).
 Like traitors, monsters can ignore all nondamaging
room features. They can use the Coal
Chute, Collapsed Room, Gallery, Mystic Elevator,
and stairs tiles, along with many of the special
movement options described on cards (such as
the Secret Stairs), unless those cards say that only
explorers can use them. They ignore the effect of the
Furnace Room and the Crypt.
 Monsters can't explore new rooms.
 Monsters can't carry items (unless the haunt says
otherwise). If a monster that is allowed to carry items
is stunned, it drops all items and puts an Item Pile
token in the room. The monster can't pick up the
items until it has an active turn.

WINNING THE GAME:
The first side (traitor or heroes) that completes its goals
for the haunt wins the game.
At least one hero must survive in order for the heroes to win.
However, some haunts include goals that are written so that
the traitor can still win the game after he or she dies. For
instance, the monsters that player controls may be able to
win the game without the traitor's help.
The game ends when one side completes its goals (listed
in the "You Win When" section of the haunt). When this
happens, someone from the winning side reads the "If You
Win" section from that side's haunt book out loud.




GAME NAME:
King of New York

HOW TO PLAY:
Players take turns in clockwise
order.
In order to see who goes first,
each player rolls the 6 black
dice and the 2 green dice,
and whoever rolls the most
Attacks
Faces for dices (King of Tokyo) (2 kinds of dice, black dice and green dice)
starts the game.
Starting with the first player, and
going clockwise: Place your Monster
in the borough of your choice,
except Manhattan. There can be
no more than 2 Monsters in any
borough.
Note: From here on out, the
rules and cards will refer to the
players as Monsters.
On Your Turn:
1. Roll the Dice (up to 3 times)
2. Resolve the Dice (mandatory)
3. Move (generally optional, but
sometimes mandatory)
4. Buy Cards (optional)
5. End Your Turn

1. ROLL THE DICE:
On your turn, you can roll the dice
up to three times.
For your first roll, you will roll the 6
black dice (the green dice are only
used with particular cards).
For your second and third rolls (both
optional), you can reroll any or all of
the dice (even ones that you chose
to keep on a previous roll).

2. RESOLVE THE DICE:
The symbols on the dice after your
final roll indicate your actions for
this turn.
You can resolve the dice in whatever
order you like, however all
the dice of the same type must
be resolved before resolving another
type.

3. MOVE:
 If there is no one in Manhattan
you must move there. When you
arrive in Manhattan, you must
place your Monster on Lower
Manhattan on the 24 space.
 If there is already 1 Monster
in any zone of Manhattan, you
have two options: You can move
to any borough that doesn't
already have 2 Monsters in it
(except Manhattan), or you can
just stay in your borough.
 If you were already in Manhattan,
advance to the 24
space in the next zone up in
Manhattan.
Note: Once you are in Upper
Manhattan, you no longer
move during this phase.
Note: If you were already in
Manhattan, you may not move
to another borough (unless you
have been damaged by another
Monster's attack).

4. BUY CARDS:
After resolving the dice and
making a move, you can buy one
or more cards from those available.
You are also welcome to spend
2 Energy cubes (2 ) in order to
discard the three available cards
and reveal three new ones.
You can buy and/or discard cards
in any order you like, and as many
times as you want, as long as you
have the Energy cubes to do so.
Each time you buy a card,
immediately reveal a
replacement for it from the
deck.
 Example: Kong has 10
and doesn't like the cards currently
available. He spends 2 to
discard the three cards and reveal
the next three. He still has 8
and sees an interesting card that
costs 3 . He buys it and reveals a
new card. He still has 5 which he
decides to keep for another turn.

5. END YOUR TURN:
Certain card effects activate
during this phase.
This is the end of your turn; pass
the dice to the player on your left.

Description of the dice:
Each die has 6 symbols.
: Energy : Heal
: Attack : Celebrity
: Destruction : Ouch!
energy
You earn 1 Energy cube
( ) for each
Faces for dices (King of tokyo) (2 kinds of dice, black dice and green dice)
you
roll.
You can hoard Energy cubes until
you want to use them.
attack
You inflict one damage for
each
Faces for dices (King of tokyo) (2 kinds of dice, black dice and green dice)
you roll.
- If you are in Manhattan each
Faces for dices (King of tokyo) (2 kinds of dice, black dice and green dice)
you roll infl icts damage to all
Monsters outside Manhattan.
- If you are not in Manhattan
each
Faces for dices (King of tokyo) (2 kinds of dice, black dice and green dice)
you roll infl icts damage
to all Monsters in Manhattan.
Each
Faces for dices (King of tokyo) (2 kinds of dice, black dice and green dice)
causes any Monster(s)
damaged to lose 1 Life Point
(1 ).
If a Monster loses its last Life
Point ( ), it is eliminated.
If there are no Monsters in
Manhattan at the start of your
turn, you don't infl ict any
damage, even if you roll
Faces for dices (King of tokyo) (2 kinds of dice, black dice and green dice)
Faces for dices (King of tokyo) (2 kinds of dice, black dice and green dice)
you rolled
allows you to heal 1 Life
Point ( ) that you've lost, unless
you are in Manhattan.
A Monster cannot have more than
10 .

DESTRUCTION:
You can use to
destroy Buildings or
eliminate Units.
The Durability of a Building or
Unit indicates the number of
you have to roll in order to destroy
it on your turn.
When you apply as many Destruction
points as the Unit or
Building's durability, it is destroyed,
and you earn as many
(for High-Rises or Tanks), (for
Power Plants or Jets), or (for
Hospitals or Infantries) as indicated
on the tile.
When you destroy a Building,
turn it over to its Unit side, and
place it in the same borough.
If there are still Buildings in
the stack, this will reveal a new
one, and you can even destroy it
immediately if you have enough
remaining.
When you destroy a Unit, take it
and put it in front of you.
You cannot destroy a Unit on the
same turn that it appears.
If you have enough to destroy
a Building or a Unit, you must
to do so; however you are not
required to optimize your .
 Example: Captain Fish rolls
, he is in Queens, where
there are 3 Buildings visible: a
Hospital 2, a High-Rise 2, and a
High-Rise 1. He decides to destroy
the High-Rise 1 and High-Rise 2
to earn 3 . He still has 1 , but
the Buildings revealed are a Hospital
3 and a High-Rise 2. He can't
destroy any more Buildings with
the he has left.

CELEBRITY:
If you roll fewer than
3 nothing happens.
If you roll triple- or more, you
take the Superstar card, and place
it in front of you. You immediately
earn 1 +1 per beyond the
fi rst three .
From now on, as long as you have
the Superstar card in front of you,
each you roll earns you 1 .
As soon as another Monster rolls a
triple- , he steals the Superstar
Ouch!
If you roll at least 1 , the
military opens fi re:
- If you rolled , the Units in
your borough attack you; you suffer
1 damage per Unit tile in your
borough.
- If you rolled , the Units
in your borough attack all the
Monsters in your borough (including
you, of course); each Monster
in your borough suffers 1 damage
per Unit tile in your borough.
- If you rolled , all Units
in the entire city attack; each
Monster suffers 1 damage per Unit
tile in his borough.
Moreover, by rolling ,
you trigger a counterattack by the
entire army, and you become the
defender of the city: The Statue
of Liberty comes to life and teams
up with you. Take the Statue of
Liberty card and place it in front
of you. As long as you have the
Statue of Liberty card in front of
you, you have an extra 3 . You
lose the extra 3 as soon as you
lose the Statue of Liberty.
card from you.
star
Take this card when you roll at least
, and gain 1 , +1 per additional
you rolled.
While you have this card, you gain
1 for each you roll.
Goal
Super
dice effects
statue of
liberty
Take this card when you roll at least .
+3 when you take this card.
-3 when you lose this card.



 GAME NAME:
 GALAXY TRUCKER

The game consists of three rounds. In each
round, the players begin by rummaging through the
Warehouse, trying to grab the best components and
build the best space ship. Once the ships are under
way, the players try to avoid snares and obstacles,
while grasping financial opportunities, each hoping
to be the first to finish with an undamaged ship.
In Round 1, players build Class I ships and fly
them on a safe short hop. In Round 2, they
build larger Class II ships to take on a more
daring journey. In Round 3, they build
gigantic Class III ships and set out for the
farthest, most dangerous corners of the
Galaxy.
Longer journeys offer greater rewards,
but also present greater dangers.
For these contracts, Corp Inc.
only accepts experienced
applicants with a strong credit
rating (and a net worth ensuring that,
if need be, Corp Inc. can collect any
debts from the contractor's estate).
The goal of the game is to have the most cosmic
credits at the end of Round 3.

COURSE OF THE GAME:
Corporation Incorporated is an interplanetary construction firm that builds
sewer systems and low-income housing on the less-developed planets of the Galaxy.
For years, Corp Inc. has tottered on the brink of bankruptcy: transporting building materials
to the edge of the Galaxy, where the need for their services is greatest, is a risky business.
The company was saved by a few visionaries on the board of directors. Instead
of shipping materials to the Periphery, they reasoned, why not build the materials
into spacecraft and let them ship themselves? Furthermore, why hire pilots if there
are nut-cases who will do it for free?
That's where you come in. Just sign the contract, and you gain unrestricted access
to a Corp Inc. warehouse. Build your own space ship from the available prefabricated
components, and fly it to the Periphery. Of course, you may have to eat a loss,
but any profits you make along the way are yours to keep, and Corporation Incorporated
will pay you a bonus for quick delivery.
It's possible that you will end up with an insurmountable debt and finish your days
panhandling on the streets of Deneb III, but if Lady Luck should smile upon you, you just
might find yourself among the 10 billion richest people in the Galaxy!
Remember the words of Wild Andy, the famous
multimillionaire-adventurer: "The best way to learn
to fly a space craft is to fly one." Of course, Andy
uttered these words just before crashing his
rocketplane into Sirius, but we're willing to give
him the benefit of the doubt.

SETUP:
Each player takes a space ship
board labeled "I". Place your
starting component on the
square with this "I". It represents
your pilot cabin. There are four of
these, each in a different color.
For fewer than four players,
leave the extra ones in the box.
Turn the other components face down
and mix them up in a pile in the center
of the table where everyone can reach
them. This pile is the Warehouse.
Near this pile, place the tiles numbered
"1" through "4" ("1" through "3" for
three players or "1" and "2" for two
players) in a row.
For now, you can leave the other game
pieces in the box.

GRABBING COMPONENTS:
When everyone is ready, the boldest player says, "Go!"
Everyone grabs a (face-down) component from the pile in the
middle of the table. You can only take one at a time. Place it on
your space ship board and turn it face up.
Now you have two possibilities: either add it to your space ship
or return it face up to the center of the table. Thus, face-up
components will appear on the table. Players can take these
or grab a face-down component, hoping for something better.
Players do not take turns. You play as fast as you can grab,
with the following rules:
You can only grab with one hand. The other hand has to
stay above your space ship board.
You can't turn up a face-down component and look at it on
the table. You have to keep it face down until it is above
your space ship board.
Until you add the component to your space ship or return it
to the center of the table, you cannot grab another one.
You can't move a component once it has been added to your
space ship, but you can move your newest component around
while deciding whether to add it and where. Until you grab
another component, you can change your mind about where
to put your newest component or whether to keep it at all.

BUILDING SHIPS:
You start with one starting component and add new ones as
you go. Each new component must be placed on an empty
square next to one already placed. Components can only be
placed on the indicated squares.
Each component has a functional part and 1 to 4 connectors.
Connectors can be simple, double, or universal.
Any connector can join with another of the same type,
and a universal connector can join with any type. A simple
connector cannot join with a double connector. Sides with
no connectors are called smooth sides. Smooth sides cannot
join with any connectors.
Each component you place must join with the rest of your space
ship. If it touches the ship on multiple sides, all connectors
must legally join. Two smooth sides may sit next to each other
as long as the piece being added makes a legal connection on
another side. Your ship must hold together at all times.

YOUR FIRST SHIP:
You can play Round 1 without reading all the rules beforehand. Read the section on building
ships  and build one. Read the section on preparing for launch  and prepare for it. Read the
section on test flights  and take the test flight. Only then do you need to read the rest of the
rules so you can play Rounds 2 and 3.

COMPONENTS:
The starting component represents your pilot cabin. It has
4 universal connectors, making it easy to build on to. The
Warehouse is full of other components you will want on your
space ship.
Cabins
You can add additional cabins to your ship,
allowing you to have a bigger crew. Bigger
crews are better so you want to have as
many cabins as possible.
Engines
Engines have special limitations: the exhaust
pipe must point to the rear of the space ship
(toward the player) and no component can
sit on the square behind the engine. This
means that the exhaust pipe either opens
into anempty square or the edge of the
building zone.
Ships with more engines are faster, so you want as many
engines as possible.
Cannons
Cannons can point in any direction, but
they are most effective when they point
forward (away from the player).
No component can sit on the square in
front of the cannon's barrel.
Many dangers await you on your journey. You may be in
combat, or you may need to blow up meteors. That's why
you want as many cannons as possible, especially forwardpointing
ones.
Double Engines and Cannons
The space ship's exterior limits the number
of engines and cannons that can be added,
high-powered components have been
developed to increase speed and fire power
beyond conventional maximums.
Engineers have tinkered with increasing surface area
to provide more mounting points. However, most
research in this direction has ceased since the Star
Ship Mbius exploded and imploded at the same time.
Double engines and cannons follow the same placement rules
as simple ones do. They have twice the power, but at the
expense of consuming a lot more energy. These components
cannot be used without batteries.
Batteries
Energy for double engines and double cannons
is stored in size E batteries. (The "E" is for
"E-normous.")
A battery component will have 2 or 3 E-cells.
Each E-cell stores enough energy to power one
use of a double engine, a double cannon, or a
shield (see below). Batteries can be anywhere
on the ship; they do not have to be next to the
component they are powering.
With matter-annihilation technology, it was possible
to store this much energy in a battery no larger than
a good cigar. Today, of course, matter annihilation
is illegal thanks to the lobbying efforts of matter
rights activists. (And narrowly defeated in the
last legislative session was a bill backed by the
gentlemen's clubs lobby to ban the use of good cigars
in silly comparisons.)
To get the most from your ship, you'll need double cannons and
double engines, which means you will want as many batteries
as possible.
Shield Generators
Shields are there for when things go wrong.
They can deflect smaller meteors and
typical hits from enemy cannons. They get
their power from batteries.
One shield generator can protect the ship
on two sides: the ones that are glowing green in the picture.
It works from any place on the ship. All that matters is which
way it is oriented.
Now you are probably expecting us to say you want as
many as possible. Of course not. You only need two shield
generators, provided they
are oriented to cover all four
directions. In fact, if you are
gutsy (or suicidal) you can fly
without any shields at all.
One shield covers the left
side and the front of the ship.
The other covers the left side
and the rear. The right side is
unprotected.
Cargo Holds
Cargo holds come with 2 or 3 containers. You
can put them anywhere. They can be used to
store the goods that you find along the way. Of
course, goods translate into profits, which is
what this journey is all about, so you want as
many cargo holds as possible.
Special Cargo Holds
Hazardous materials can only be transported in
reinforced containers, which are found in
special cargo holds. (These holds only have 1 or
2 containers.) Normal goods can be transported
in special holds or normal holds, but hazardous
goods can only be transported in special holds.
Of course there are thousands of horror stories
illustrating why hazardous goods should not be
transported in normal containers. We give only the
example of James "Skip" Fairweather, who decided
to transport several tons of plutonium in used fruit
crates. Upon landing, he lost both arms and one leg
to a mob of angry environmentalists.
Hazardous goods are the most valuable, so it is important to
have a lot of special cargo holds.
Structural Modules
Structural modules don't seem very important
because they don't do anything. However, they
have a lot of connectors, many of them
universal. Structural modules can make your
ship more durable so that it doesn't fly apart
the first time it gets hit by something.
Odd Bits with Unknown Purpose
Don't worry about these
other components right
now. On your first flight,
you can treat them just like
structural modules.

THE WELL-BUILT SHIP:
Above all, your ship must be built according to the rules. In
addition, it should be solid, bristling with cannons and engines,
full of cabins, batteries, and holds, and completely protected by
shields.
Exposed Connectors
Connectors that are not connected, i.e., those not adjacent
to another component, are considered to be exposed.
This ship has 8 exposed connectors
Exposed connectors are allowed, but they increase the risk
of damage to your ship and in some cases they can slow it
down. The ends of exposed pipes get warped in transit, so
Corporation Incorporated pays a bonus for ships that arrive
with few exposed connectors.

FINISHING YOUR SHIP:
Once you are happy with your ship (or once you run out of good
places to add on more components) you can finish your ship.
You do not have to place a component on every square of your
ship board.
To finish your ship, simply take the number
tile with the lowest remaining number. If
everyone else finishes before you, you will be
left with the highest-numbered tile, but you
will have as much time to finish your ship as you want. (In the
full game, there is a time limit, but for your first game, we
assume that anyone taking an unreasonably long time can be
persuaded to finish by gently thumping the box lid against his
head.)
The tiles determine the order in which the space ships will
launch. It is not enough to build a perfect space ship with lots
of everything and no exposed connectors. You want to be
the first.
But, before taking that tile, double-check to be sure your ship
is built according to the rules. In your first game, we can be
lenient. If you see a mistake, just remove a component so that
it no longer violates the rule, and play on.
Typical mistakes include:
A simple connector adjacent to a double.
Any type of connector adjacent to a smooth edge.
An engine not pointing toward the rear.
A component placed immediately behind an engine.
A component placed immediately in front of a cannon's
barrel.
A component outside the indicated building area.
A component or part of the ship not attached to the rest.
SPOT CHECK
Check everyone else's ship to be sure they are all built according
to the rules. Anyone found to have violated a ship building rule
must return his or her number tile and fix the mistake. Redistribute
the number tiles among those with legal ships so
that the highest numbers are left for those who are re-building

BANK:
Now you can take the sack and dump out all the figures,
blocks, markers, and dice. This is the bank. You want to keep
these things accessible but out of the way.

THE FLIGHT BOARD:
Remove all the remaining
components from the center
of the table and lay down the
flight board. In the center of
the flight board is a price list
and a graphical summary of
the rules for Round 1.
Around these information
boxes is a circle of triangular shapes. These are the spaces of
the game board which will indicate the relative position of your
ships. Each space represents one day of flight.
Take the two space ship markers in your color. Set one in
front of you and put the other one on the flight board. The
rules summary depicts the initial separation between your
space ships: The player with tile number 1 puts his or her
ship on the indicated starting space and the player with tile
number 2 puts his or her ship 2 spaces behind it. (That is,
with one empty space between, as shown in the diagram on
the game board.) The other players go behind the first two
with the same amount of separation. You can set the number
tiles aside now. Your figures on the flight board represent
your order of flight, which can change during the course of
the game. The player in front will be referred to as the leader.

PREPARING YOUR SHIP:
In each cabin, place 2 grey
figures. These are humans in
grey space suits. (The ones in
the other colors are aliens, but
you don't have to worry about
them right now.)
On each battery component,
place 2 or 3 green tokens
(depending on how many E-cells
are depicted).

ADVENTURE CARDS:
The adventure cards represent various
dangers and opportunities that you may
encounter on your journey.
From the deck labeled "I", take the eight
cards marked with an asterisk in the
lower left corner. Shuffle these eight
cards and set them near the flight board.

COSMIC CREDITS:
And now the best part: take the cosmic credits
and place them in neat stacks near the bank. On
your journey, you can look at them from time to
time and anticipate just how much money you
are going to make.
Far more important than money, of course, is the thrill
of adventure. And fame. And glory. And honor... Oh
who are we kidding? With enough money, you can
buy adventure, fame, glory, and honor and still have
enough left over for dinner at a fancy restaurant.
When you earn cosmic credits, you set them in front of you
face down to keep your total hidden.

PREPARING FOR LAUNCH:
Right now, you do not need to read on.
Go build your first ship.
Pop Quiz: Find 7
things wrong with
this ship.

WHAT CAN HAPPEN TO YOU:
Hits to Your Ship
A box in the corner of the game board depicts the possible
dangers your ship might face. Each threat comes from
a certain direction in a specific row or column. This will be
explained in greater detail later, but here is a summary:
You can protect your ship from small
meteors by building it well (they just
bounce off unless they hit an exposed
connector) or by using a shield (which
will cost you 1 battery token).
You can protect your ship from large
meteors by shooting them with a
cannon.
You can protect your ship from light
cannon fire with a shield (which will cost
you 1 battery token).
Nothing protects your ship from heavy
cannon fire.
If your ship is hit (because you can't or won't protect it) the
component that was hit must be removed. This might cause
some other components to become disconnected. Remove them
as well. If your ship is broken into two pieces, you decide which
piece you will pilot to your destination and which piece will be lost.
max -5
Lost components are placed in your
discard pile, on the right side of your ship
board. When you reach your destination,
you will have to forfeit 1 cosmic credit for
each lost component. Any playing pieces (crew, battery tokens,
goods) on lost components are returned to the bank.
Don't worry about the crew members in those cabins
that were blasted away. Should the cabin experience
a loss of pressure, stasis cocoons will drop from
overhead compartments and wrap them up safely
until they are rescued. They are the lucky ones,
really. Think of the thousands of years of interest that
will have accumulated in their bank accounts by the
time someone finds them.
Gaining and Losing Flight Days
Some cards have a number in the lower right
corner. This tells how many days you will lose if
you use the card. Whenever you lose flight days,
voluntarily or not, move your marker back that
many empty spaces.
If Blue loses 3 flight days, he will end up in the space just in
front of Red.
Similarly, when you gain flight days, move your marker that
many empty spaces forward. There can never be two
markers on the same space.
Getting Goods
When a card enables you
to load goods onto your
ship, take the indicated colored blocks from the
bank and place them in your cargo containers.
(Each cargo hold has 1 to 3 containers.) Each
container can only hold 1 block. Excess goods
have to be dumped into space (returned to the
bank). The price list will help you decide what to
keep and what to dump.
Red blocks are the most valuable, but they are
hazardous materials and must be kept in the
reinforced containers found in special cargo
holds. If you don't have enough reinforced
containers, you have to discard excess red
blocks.
As long as you have enough space, you should
take everything you can get  even if you have
to put cheap goods in special cargo holds.
When you load new goods, you can always
re-arrange or discard any amount of cargo.
Dumping goods into space is a violation
of anti-littering laws, punishable by fines and
imprisonment. Under no circumstances should you
ever tell the authorities that we were the ones who
recommended that you do this.
Loss of Goods or Crew
-2 If a card requires you to give up goods, you must
return the most valuable goods to the bank. If
you don't have enough goods to cover the
indicated loss, you must give up green battery
tokens to make up the difference. Once you are
out of goods and battery tokens, they can't take
any more from you.
-3 If a card requires you to give up crew,
return that many figures to the bank. If
you don't have enough, just give up all you
have. (In the full game, not having enough
crew to meet the card's requirement
would be a bigger problem.)

THE FLIGHT:
The test flight shows who built the best ship. It consists of 8 adventure cards. (In the
full game, these cards will be chosen at random, but for your first flight, we use the 8
with asterisks to ensure that you will meet with every type of event.) The adventure
cards have various effects.

PARAMETERS OF YOUR SHIP:
Sometimes you have to count up the strength of your engines
or cannons.
Double engines and double cannons need power. Each time
you have to calculate the strength of your engines or cannons,
you must decide which double engines or cannons you will
power and spend batteries for them.
Engine Strength
+1 +2 Each simple engine counts as 1.
Each double engine on which you spend a
green battery token counts as 2.
Cannon Strength
+1 +2
+0,5 +0,5
+1 +1
Each forward-pointing simple cannon
counts as 1.
Each forward-pointing double cannon on
which you spend a green battery token
counts as 2.
Each cannon pointing to the side or to
the rear counts at only half value (1/2
for a simple cannon or 1 for a double
cannon on which you spend a green
token).

ADVENUTURE CARDS:

OPEN SPACE:
Open Space is like a wide open drag strip.
The leader announces the strength of his or
her engines. (See Parameters of Your Ship
above.) The leader must decide whether or
not to spend battery tokens on any double
engines. Then the leader moves his or her
marker ahead a number of spaces equal to
the engine strength.
In order, each player decides which engines to power,
announces strength, and moves his or her ship forward that
many empty spaces. Any player overtaking another will pass
him or her because occupied spaces are not counted. (See
What Can Happen to You  Gaining and Losing Flight Days,
above.)

PLANETS:
A Planets card has 2 to 4 rows of goods
representing planets where you can land to
pick up goods. Landing on a planet will cost
you the number of flight days indicated in the
lower right corner. If you want to land, place
your marker (the extra one that is sitting in
front of you) on the planet you choose. Only
one player's marker is allowed per row.
The leader chooses first, followed by the other players
in order. No player is required to land. In fact, if there are
few planets, the players in the lead may occupy all of them,
preventing the others from landing at all.
The players who chose to land load the indicated goods on
their ships. Goods can be re-arranged or discarded at this
time. (See What Can Happen to You  Gaining Goods, above.)
It is legal to land just to take the opportunity away from other
players, even if you can't take any of the goods (but be sure it
is worth the loss of flight days).
You are paying for these goods, not stealing them, but
it is hard to tell the difference. The cost to you is only
an insignificant fraction of a credit. The natives are
willing to accept any artifacts of civilization in trade
glass beads, carbonated beverages, a video chip with
a copy of the latest installment of their favorite soap
opera.
Once everyone has decided whether to land, those who
landed move their markers back that many empty spaces with
the player who is farthest behind moving first. (See What
Can Happen to You  Gaining and Losing Flight Days, above.)
The leader (initially, the player with tile number 1) turns up the first adventure card. This
card is dealt with as described below or on the following pages. (Each adventure will come
up once, so you can read about them one-at-a-time as the cards are turned up.) Next, the
leader (which may be a different player if the adventure mixed up the order) turns up the
next card, and so on, until all eight adventures have occurred.

ABANDONED SHIP:
If you find an abandoned ship, you're in
gravy! There is some sort of protocol for
reporting these things, but what the heck.
Surely some of your crew are sick of you by
now and have been saving for a ship of their
own. Fix up the abandoned ship and sell it to
them for a fair price.
Only one player can use this opportunity.
The leader decides first. He or she can return the specified
number of crew figures to the bank and take the indicated
number of cosmic credits. This also costs a certain number
of flight days. (See What Can Happen to You  Gaining and
Losing Flight Days, above.)
If the leader chooses not to take advantage of the opportunity, it
falls to the next player in line, and so on. Once someone decides
to fix up the space ship, the remaining players are out of luck.
Sometimes you'll find a ship that you'll be tempted
to keep for yourself. Don't be greedy. Let the crew
have it. There's probably a reason that ship was
abandoned.

ABANDONED STATION:
When fleeing the tragic disaster that befell
this space station, the inhabitants probably
left behind some good loot. It will take a big
crew to search for it, though. To use this
opportunity, you must have at least as many
crew on board as required by the card.
Only one player can use this opportunity.
The leader decides first. If the leader has
enough crew, he or she can dock and get to work. If the leader
can't or won't, the opportunity falls to the next person in line,
and so on. Once someone decides to dock, the others are out
of luck.
When you dock with a space station, take the indicated goods
and place them on your ship. (You can re-arrange or discard
goods. See What Can Happen to You  Gaining Goods.) Move
your marker back the indicated number of empty spaces. (See
What Can Happen to You  Gaining and Losing Flight Days.)
Note that on an abandoned space station you lose no crew.
(The crew symbol does not have a minus sign, as it does on an
abandoned ship.)

METEORIC SWARM:
A meteoric swarm can really mess with
your paint job. This card depicts several
large and/or small meteors and the
directions they come from. Meteors are
dealt with one at a time. They affect every
player simultaneously.
For each meteor, the leader rolls two dice.
The roll determines which row or column
the meteor can impact (rows for meteors with left or right
arrows, columns for meteors with up or down arrows).
The row and column numbers are given on the edge of your
ship board. Each player checks to see which component is
threatened by the meteor. For some die rolls, it could miss
your ship entirely. If it does not, proceed as follows:
A small meteor will harmlessly bounce off of a well
built ship. It is only a problem if it hits an exposed
connector (pipes pointing out in the direction from
which the meteor is coming). In this case, you can
still avoid damage by powering up a shield if you
have one that protects that side. You must pay 1
green battery token to do this. If you can't or won't
avoid the impact, the component the meteor hits
is removed from your ship. (See What Can Happen
to You  Getting Hit, above.)
A large meteor is, of course, even more
dangerous. It will damage even a well built ship and
shields cannot stop it. Your only hope is to blast
it. You can only shoot it if you have a cannon pointed
at it in the same column. If it is a double cannon,
you will have to pay 1 green battery token to use it.
Large meteors tend to come from in front of you,
which is why we recommended you pay special
attention to cannons pointing forward.
If you don't shoot a large meteor, the component
it hits is removed from your ship. (See What Can
Happen to You  Getting Hit, above.)

ENEMIES (SMUGGLERS, SLAVERS, PIRATES):
Enemies pose a threat to everyone, but
they attack the players' ships in order. First,
they attack the leader. If they win, they
attack the next player in line, and so on,
until they have attacked everyone or until
someone defeats them.
These cards are divided into two parts. In
the darker top half is shown what happens
to you if you lose. (If you lose to the smugglers, you must give
up 2 goods  the most valuable ones.) In the lighter bottom
half is shown what you get if you win. (If you defeat smugglers,
you win the indicated goods.)
The strength of the enemy is given by the number next to the
cannon symbol. (These smugglers have strength 4.)
The leader counts the strength of his or her ship (paying for
any double cannons used). If this strength is greater than the
enemy's, the player wins and claims the reward. This costs
a certain number of flight days specified in the lower right
corner. (See What Can Happen to You  Gaining and Losing
Flight Days.) If a player wins, the enemies go away and the
remaining players are not attacked.
If the player loses (has a lower strength than the enemy), he
or she pays the penalty specified in the upper half of the card.
In case of a tie (when the player has strength equal to the
enemy's) nothing happens to the player. In either of these last
two cases, the undefeated enemy moves on to attack the
next player in line, according to the same rules.
Red is the leader. He could have
a strength of 5 (2 for simple
cannons, 2 for the double
cannon pointing forward, 1 for
the double cannon pointing to
the side) but this would cost
2 battery tokens and he only
has 1. He decides to use it,
giving him a strength of 4,
which matches the smugglers.
The result is a tie and nothing
happens to red.
Green is next in line. By paying
2 battery tokens, she has
strength 4 1/2. This is enough
to defeat the smugglers
and take 2 of their goods.
(She discards the blue block
because she can't fit it on her
ship.) She also moves her ship
back 1 empty space.
Blue is lucky to have been
flying last. He can't make his
strength go higher than 3,
so if no one ahead of him had
defeated the smugglers, he
would have lost his goods.

COMBAT ZONE:
The true test of any space ship is to fly it
through a combat zone. The Combat Zone
card has 3 lines which are evaluated in
succession. Each line gives a criterion and
a penalty for the player who is weakest in
that area. (If multiple players are tied for
being weakest, the one who is farthest
ahead pays the penalty.)
The only remaining combat zones are in the
barbarous regions of the Periphery. War-time
activities that harm thinking creatures or machines
have been outlawed by the New New New Geneva
Convention, so war has lost a lot of its punch. And
really, it has always been more effective to fill the
enemy's economy with cheap goods than to fill his
sky with battleships.
First, the player with the fewest crew figures loses 3 flight
days. (See What Can Happen to You  Gaining and Losing
Flight Days.)
Next, the player with the weakest engines (see Parameters
of Your Ship  Engine Strength) loses two crew members.
Players count up their engine strength in order, starting with
the leader, deciding whether or not to spend battery tokens
on double engines.
Yellow has engine
strength 3. He has no
double engines, so he has
no decisions to make.
Green can have engine
strength 1, 3, or 5, depending
on whether she spends
0, 1, or 2 battery tokens.
Yellow is ahead, so if they are tied for strength, Yellow
will have to pay the penalty and green player will not.
Green only needs to spend 1 battery token.
Finally, the player with the weakest cannons (see Parameters
of Your Ship  Cannon Strength) is threatened by light cannon
fire from behind and heavy cannon fire from behind. Again,
players decide in order, starting with the leader, which double
cannons they will pay for.
Hits from cannon fire work like hits from meteors (see
Meteoric Swarm) except they are more difficult to defend
against. Each hit has a direction. The player rolls two dice to
determine which row or column the hit is coming from, thus
determining which component of the ship (if any) is in danger.
The only way to defend against light cannon fire is
with a shield that protects against hits from
that direction. This can be powered at the cost of
1 green battery token. Otherwise, the component
is destroyed. (See What Can Happen to You  Hits
to Your Ship.)
There is no way to defend against heavy
cannon fire. Your only hope against it is to roll
high enough or low enough that it misses your
ship entirely. Otherwise, the component it hits
is destroyed. (See What Can Happen to You
Hits to Your Ship.)

SPECIAL EVENT: STARDUST:
Lose 1 flight day
for each exposed
connector.
Yellow cards are special events. Their
effect is written on the card.
The Stardust event says that every player
loses 1 flight day for every exposed
connector. (Each exposed connector only
counts once, regardless of whether it is
simple, double, or universal.) Starting with
the last player, each player counts his or
her exposed connectors and moves his or her marker back
that many empty spaces. (See What Can Happen to You
Gaining and Losing Flight Days.)

REWARDS AND PENALTIES:
The information in the center of the flight board depicts the
rewards and penalties you receive at the end of your flight.
You should deal with these in order from left to right: first
bonuses, then sale of goods, and finally penalties.
Bonuses
The rules box in the center of the game board depicts the
bonuses available for Round 1.
4-3-2-1
The numbers separated by dashes
tell how many credits you get based
on the order in which you land at
your destination. So, after the last
adventure card has been dealt with,
the leader gets 4 cosmic credits,
the second place finisher gets 3,
and so on.
[+2 ]
The number in square brackets gives the
bonus for the player who lands with the bestlooking
ship. Count up the number of exposed
connectors on your ships. (Each exposed
connector only counts once, regardless of
whether it is simple, double, or universal.)
Whoever has the fewest gets the indicated
bonus. (If there is a tie for the fewest, all
those players receive the bonus.)
Goods
Return all your
goods to the
bank, and take the
number of cosmic
credits indicated
by the price list.
Losses
Now you have to deliver the components
of your ship to Corporation Incorporated.
For each component you lost along the
way you lose 1 cosmic credit. (When you
lost components, you placed them in the
discard pile on your space ship board, so it
is easy to keep track of how many you lost.)
Fortunately, the Department of Stellar
Vehicles requires every space ship to be
insured, so there is a limit to how much
you can lose. This maximum is given in
the discard area of your ship board. (For Class I ships, the
limit is 5 cosmic credits.) Even if you lost more components
than this, you only have to pay this many cosmic credits.
Pangalactic Insurance Company will pay the difference to
Corp Inc. just as soon as they can get a claims adjuster out to
the edge of the Galaxy.
However, if you lose over twice this many components ...
well, then you still just pay the maximum. But Corporation
Incorporated will fire the guy who signed you up for this job.
How you assuage your guilty conscience is up to you.
It is well known that matter warps space.
Less well advertised is that documents warp truth.
A Pangalactic Insurance policy, which takes into
consideration such factors as time dilation, the
Fitzgerald contraction, and the Doppler effect, is the
legal equivalent of a black hole: everyone's money
gets sucked in, and none of it ever comes back out.

THE END OF THE ROUND:
Congratulations on completing your first flight. Return all
tokens, blocks, and figures to the bank. Take all your space
ship components except your pilot cabin and put them in
the Warehouse pile in the center of the table. The adventure
cards can be returned to the box: in the next rounds you will
be using different cards.
Keep your cosmic credits. You should stack them in a tidy pile
face down in front of you so that no one else can see them.
(The other players should be trying to make their own money,
not staring longingly at yours.)
Now you can read the full rules and either play Rounds 2 and
3 or start a new game from the beginning.

JOURNEY'S END:
Your trip is over once the last of the eight adventure cards has been dealt with.

SET UP:
In each round, use the ship boards with the corresponding
number. (In Round 3, use board III, not IIIa.)
The shape requirements for ships of classes I, II, and
III were established by the Aldebaran Accord, which
resolved several decades of conflict between the
Union of Trans-Galactic Engineers and the Science
Fiction Writers Association.
II II I
Before you start building your
ships, get out the flight board and
set it near the Warehouse. If this is
the start of Round 2 or Round 3,
find the appropriate rules card and
place it on the board over top of the
rules for Round 1.

ADVENTURE CARDS:
In the full game, you may take advantage of Corporation
Incorporated's prognostics division and look at the adventure
cards while you are building your ship.
Before everyone starts grabbing for components, make three
piles of adventure cards, chosen at random, and place them
on the indicated squares on the flight board. Each pile should
contain the cards depicted in the lower left corner of the rules
card. Each pile contains 2 cards from the deck corresponding to
the current round and 1 card from each lower-numbered deck.
Looking at Cards
If you have added at least one component to your ship, you can
take a break from building and pick up any one of the three
piles to look through those cards. When you return them, you
can resume building or look through another pile. You can look
at a pile for as long as you like, and you can pick it up as often
as you like. Be sure to return each pile to the place where you
picked it up to make it easier for everyone to tell which piles
they have seen already.
Of course, looking at the cards takes up time that could be
spent grabbing components, but the information on what you
might encounter in that part of the Galaxy can be very helpful.
(For example, if you see a lot of planets, you might want more
cargo holds.)
Preparing the Adventure Cards
When everyone is done building, you add a pile of cards that
no one has seen yet. Make a fourth pile of cards the same
way you made the other three. Put all four piles together and
shuffle thoroughly. If the number on the top card does not
match the number of the round, keep shuffling until it does.
(This won't be an issue in Round 1, of course.)
It is theoretically possible to predict everything that
happens to you, but it is forbidden by the Department
of Antiperfectionism's "Preservation of Suspense on
Space Flights" regulations.
In Round 1, you will have three piles of two cards each. When
you mix in the fourth pile, you will have 8 cards, just as you
did in the test flight. In later rounds, you will have more cards
because they are longer flights.

THE TIMER:
Saying "Go!"
II
In Round 1, the boldest player says "Go!"
In Rounds 2 and 3, this role falls to the
player who landed first in the previous
round. In addition to saying "Go!" this
player must start the timer and put it in
the circle on the flight board that
corresponds to the round number.
Turning Over the Timer
The timer measures how much time is left for building ships.
When time runs out, any player may turn the timer over and
place it on the next circle (from a higher number to a lower).
Usually, this is done by someone who is progressing well and
doesn't want to give the others a chance to catch up.

FULL RULES:
The following text assumes that you have already made your first flight. This section
gives only the additional rules that are used in the full game. Use these rules for Rounds
2 and 3 in your first game. In later games, you use these rules in Round 1 as well.
The Last Flip
start
When the time runs out on the timer
sitting in circle number 1, it can be flipped
over one last time and set in the circle
marked "Start". However, only a player
who has finished building and taken a
numbered tile may do this.
The last flip measures how much time the
rest of the players have to complete their ships. When that
time runs out, no one can add another component. Everyone
stops building and takes a numbered tile. (The lowest
numbered remaining tile goes to whoever grabs it first.)
In Round 1 of a full game, the situation is as follows: the
boldest player sets the timer on circle 1 while saying "Go!"
The first player to finish building takes tile number 1. By this
time, the timer has probably run out, so the player turns it
over and sets it on the circle labeled "Start", thus giving the
other players their final countdown. (If it is still running, of
course, the player has to wait until it is done.)
In Round 2, the timer starts on circle 2. When it runs out,
anyone can turn it over and place it on circle 1. You can't flip it
over from circle 2 directly to the "Start" circle, not even if you
have finished building and taken a numbered tile. You have to
let it run out in circle 1 first.

SETTING COMPONENTS ASIDE:
While building, you can have up to two
components set aside. These go in the
upper right corner of your ship board
(i.e., your discard pile). No one can take
these from you, but you cannot return them to the
Warehouse. The only thing you can do with them is add them
to your ship. When you add one of them, you have room to set
a new component aside, but you can never have more than
two set aside at one time. If you set aside a component and
then fail to add it to your ship, you leave it in your discard pile.
It counts against you at the end of your trip as a component
lost along the way.
No one cares that the components are still lying there
at the launch site, nor that this junk is only worth
a fraction of the penalty Corp Inc. charges you for
losing it. A contract is a contract.

ALIENS:
Life Support Components
So what are those funny components that we
refused to explain earlier? The orange and
purple components are life support systems for
aliens.
In order for the life support system to have
any effect, it must join with a cabin. This
makes the cabin inhabitable by aliens of the
corresponding color. (But you can't put an alien
in your starting component, the pilot cabin.)
Humans, in grey space suits, don't need any
special life support components, and can go
in any cabin.
Placing the Crew
Crew figures are placed according to the following rules:
The pilot cabin gets 2 humans. (Neither of these is "you".
But they will be your close roommates on a long voyage,
so after a while you might start thinking they are you.)
A cabin that is not joined to a life support system gets
2 humans.
A cabin joined to a life support system gets 2 humans or
1 alien of the corresponding color.
A cabin joined to one life support system of each color gets
either 2 humans or 1 purple alien or 1 orange alien.
Your ship can have no more than 1 alien of each color.
Possibilities for placing crew.
Players decide how to place their crew one at a time, starting
with the player with tile 1.
Alien Abilities
Aliens are crew members and are counted as such in a
Combat Zone or an Abandoned Station. You can send them
away on an Abandoned Ship or give them up to Slavers.
The disadvantage of taking an alien on board is that it takes
up the space of two humans. But, of course, there are some
advantages.
Purple aliens are a war-like species. If you have a
purple alien, you get +2 to cannon strength. (If your
cannon strength without the alien is 0, you don't get
this bonus. It's not going to fight a space battle with
its bare teeth.)
Orange aliens are good mechanics. If you have an
orange alien, you get +2 to engine strength. (If your
engine strength without the alien is 0, you don't get
this bonus. It's not going to get out and push.)
Hits on Life Support Systems
If your ship loses a life support system and this leaves an alien
in a cabin that can no longer support it, return the alien to the
bank. (It leaves in an emergency escape pod, of course.)
SHIP BUILDING MISTAKES
If you find that you have added a piece illegally, there is nothing
you can do (unless you just put it there and have not picked
up a new one). The problem will be dealt with during the spot
check, before launch.
Spot Check
The penalty for an illegal ship is much harsher in the full
game. During the spot check, make sure that your ship is built
according to the rules. If your ship is in violation, you have to
remove one or more components so that the result conforms
to the rules. This does not count as extra building (you keep
your number tile) but you can't add any new components. The
removed pieces are placed in the pile of components lost
along the way. You will have to pay a penalty for them when
you reach your destination.
This ship has a mistake. To fix it, the player must remove
either the cabin or the battery. He wants to put an alien in the
cabin, so he removes the battery. When he does so, he also
loses one of the engines. Both components are placed in his
discard pile on his ship board.
Flaws Discovered During Flight
If someone discovers that your ship is illegal in flight (any time
after the first adventure card has been revealed) you must
immediately correct the mistake as described above and pay
1 cosmic credit to the bank for violating the laws of physics.

ADVANCED ENEMIES:
In the full game, you will also encounter Pirates and Slavers.
When you defeat them you don't gain goods; you gain cold,
hard cosmic credits. Move your ship back the indicated
number of empty spaces and take the credits from the bank.
If you don't want to lose flight days, you can choose not to take
the credits (or goods in the case of Smugglers) and leave your
ship where it is. Either way, no other player may collect the
reward once the enemy has been defeated.
If the Slavers defeat you, they force you to
give up some of your crew. You choose
which humans or aliens to surrender in
exchange for your own freedom.
If the Pirates defeat you, your ship gets
shot at. (The card indicates the size and
direction of the cannon fire.) Keep track of
all the players who were defeated and then
have the first defeated player roll two dice
to determine the row or column of each
shot. This roll applies to all defeated players.
Light cannon fire can only be stopped by a
shield oriented in the correct direction and
powered by a battery. Heavy cannon fire
cannot be stopped. (See Combat Zone.)

METEORIC SWARM:
In later rounds, meteors can come at your
ship from the left or right. Large meteors
coming from in front of you can only be
blown up by a forward-pointing cannon in
the column from which they are
approaching, but large meteors from the
side can be blown up by a cannon pointing
toward that side in the same row or in an
adjacent row. (The ship accelerates or
decelerates just enough to shoot the meteor.) This doesn't
apply to small meteors, which are too small to be hit by
cannon fire.
Most space craft are protected from meteors by
autotargeting gun turrets, self-guided missiles, or
disintegration fields. Yours is protected by cannons
made from sewer drills.

SPECIAL EVENTS:
Each occupied
cabin joined to another
occupied cabin loses
1 crew member.
An Epidemic can strike in Round 2 or 3. This
adventure card makes you remove 1 crew
member (human or alien) from every
occupied cabin that is joined to another
occupied cabin. The safe thing to do is to
build your ship so that no two cabins are
joined. If you do have connected cabins, you
can try to empty one of them before the
epidemic strikes. (It is very helpful to know if
Epidemic is among the adventure cards for that round.)
The player with the
fewest crew members
loses 1 ship component
at random. (Roll for it.
If 3 rolls fail to select a
component on the ship,
the saboteur gives up.)
Sabotage can occur in Round 3. This
adventure card blows up a random
component on the ship with the smallest
crew. (If multiple ships are tied for smallest
crew, the one in front is sabotaged.) To
select the component, the affected player
rolls 2 dice to determine the column and 2
dice to determine the row. If there is no
component at those coordinates, roll again
for new coordinates. If there is no component there, roll
again. If three sets of coordinates are rolled without hitting a
component, the saboteurs give up and nothing happens.
If the saboteurs blow up a component, it is set aside as lost in
flight, as are any others that fall off as a result of this loss. A
hit to the center of the ship can be devastating.

GIVING UP:
In the full game, you might have to give up before you reach
your destination. Sometimes you might even choose to give
up. Fortunately, you can always find a Corp Inc. warehouse
nearby.
If you give up:
Remove your marker from the game board. You are just a
spectator for the rest of the round and none of the cards
can affect you.
You don't get any bonuses for the order in which you
finished (because you didn't finish, obviously). When giving
bonuses for the ship with the fewest exposed connectors,
your ship does not count.
You do get to sell your goods, but only at half the total
price. Add up the total full sale price of all your goods and
take half that many credits. (Round up.)
You have to pay the penalty for the components you
lost along the way. (Anything you haven't lost yet can be
returned to Corp Inc. without penalty, so only pay for
those in your discard pile. Don't forget that there is a limit
to how big your penalty can be.)
If you are the only one left after everyone else has given
up, you can keep going and try to go through the remaining
adventures by yourself. In this case, ignore the Combat Zone
and Sabotage adventures (which penalize the player with the
fewest engines, cannons, or crew members).
Losing All Humans
You have to give up if an adventure card leaves you
without any humans on board. (Aliens can't run the ship by
themselves.) This could be due to taking a hit that destroys
your last occupied cabin, to losing crew after encountering
a Combat Zone or Slavers, or to voluntarily sending your last
crew member off on an Abandoned Ship. If this happens in a
Combat Zone, you cannot withdraw your ship from the race
until all effects of the card have been dealt with.
Open Space without Engines
Thanks to inertia, your ship can finish the journey even
without engines as long as you don't encounter Open
Space. When confronted by an Open Space card, you have
to give up if your engine strength is zero (which could be due
to having no engines or to having only double engines and
no battery power left). Don't forget that the orange alien
does not add to your engine strength when you have none
to begin with.
Getting Lapped
If the leader laps you (i.e., you are more than 1 full circle
behind) you must give up.
Choosing to Give Up
Sometimes, it might be better to give up and cut your losses.
You can decide to give up, but you must do so before the next
adventure card is revealed. (If you decide to give up after
seeing an adventure card, you must suffer through that
adventure first.)

SHORTER GAME:
With experienced players, a full game usually takes about an
hour. For a shorter game, you can just play one or two rounds.
It is up to you whether to leave out the shorter rounds or the
longer rounds.
ROUND 3A
Experienced players can make the game longer and more
challenging by playing an extra round. The extra round is
played according to the Round 3 rules using ships of Class
IIIa. (You may have noted that this board has no discard area.
You can just keep your discarded components beside your
board. These ships are uninsurable, so you must pay for every
component you lose. There is no maximum penalty.)
You can also leave out Round 3 and just play 3a.
MORE FORESIGHT
If you have good memories and like planning ahead, use the
following rules:
Don't mix up the three stacks of adventure cards. Don't
change their order when you look at them during building.
Don't shuffle them together once everyone is done building.
Instead, just stack them neatly on top of each other and put
the fourth stack (with cards no one has seen) on the bottom.
Now you know what will happen and when (except for the last
set of cards).

TEAM PLAY:
After playing several games, you will find yourself becoming
much swifter at grabbing tiles and building your ship. This can
cause problems when introducing new players to the game.
The final timer will run out before they are done building and
they will have worse ships than they would have if they were
just playing against each other. It's not much fun to fly through
space in a half-built ship. Team play can help fix this problem.
This variant is for four people. The most experienced player
should be partnered with the least experienced player, and the
remaining two players form the other team. Partners should
sit across from each other. The game is played according to
the usual rules with two exceptions:
1. Partners keep their cosmic credits together in one pile.
2. After building, you fly your partner's ship.
The beginner will see what it is like to fly a well built ship and
you can nostalgicly re-live your first space flights, when it was
a great accomplishment just to get to the finish. Your partner
will get better quickly. The desire to build you a good ship
can be better motivation than the struggle to keep up with
experienced players in a standard game.
Team Play for Experienced Players
Team play can be fun for experienced players. It adds new
tactical elements, such as deciding whether it is better to use
an opportunity yourself or to leave it for your partner.
You can just play as described above or you can use this
shared ship building rule: When the timer is moved from one
numbered circle to another, the player who does so calls out
"switch". Each player must move to the opposite side of the
table and build on the ship his or her partner was working
on. There is no switch when the timer is moved from circle
1 to the "Start" circle, so you will not switch during building in
Round 1. You will switch once in Round 2 and twice in Round
3. After building, you switch one more time to go fly your
partner's ship, as you do in standard team play (so you will still
get your exercise even in Round 1).
You will have to find your bearings quickly to be able to figure
out what your partner was working on and what the ship needs
for completion. The resulting ship will truly be a team effort.
Your goal was to make money, and you did.
So what if some other jokers made more?
Of course, the player who has the most credits is a bit more
of a winner than everyone else.

VARIANTS:

THE WINNERS:
The game ends after Round 3, once all the rewards have been collected and all the
penalties paid. Add up all your cosmic credits. If that number is 1 or more, you win!
What if I don't have enough credits to pay
my penalty at the end of a round?
Just return all your credits to the bank. You will start the next
round (if there is one) with zero.
Yes, we did say you would be up to your ears in
debt. That was just to scare you. The truth is that
the science of bankruptcy is advancing faster than
subquantum physics. Because of the number of ways
to hide money in accounts belonging to your children,
your spouses, and your clones, there is no way you
can ever be in debt.
What if I am the first to finish building, but
I don't want to start out in front?
When you are done building, you can take any of the remaining
numbers. If the first player to finish does not take tile number
1, it will be there for someone else to take.
Can I decide not to use a simple engine or
simple cannon?
No. Simple motors, simple cannons, and bonuses for aliens
are always added in. The only thing you can decide is whether
to use a double engine or double cannon (and pay 1 battery
token for it). (Similarly, you decide whether to use shields.)
Can I shoot a big meteor with a cannon in
the middle of my ship?
Yes. Your cannon must be pointed in the right direction and
be in the same column as the meteor (against a big meteor
coming from ahead) or in the same row or one of the two
adjacent rows (against a big meteor coming from the side).
Of course, the square in front of the cannon's barrel must be
empty; otherwise it is an illegal ship.
What if I have exposed connectors inside
my ship?
If your ship has a hole in the middle, connectors adjacent to the
hole still count as exposed connectors. They are protected
from meteors, however, because the meteor will strike the
first component in the given row or column.
Can I decide which block, figure, or token
to give up?
Yes. When forced to discard goods, you must discard the
most expensive ones first, but when choosing between two of
the same color, you decide. When giving up crew, you decide
whether to give up aliens or humans and which cabins they
will come from. Similarly, you decide which batteries to use. It
is recommended to first use up the parts of the ship you are
most likely to lose.
Can I re-arrange goods, crew, and batteries
at any time?
No. The only things you can re-arrange are goods, and these
can only be re-arranged when you gain new ones.
What if the bank runs out of goods?
If the bank runs out of goods of the type you are supposed
to load, you are out of luck. You don't get them. On planets,
players should load goods in order, starting with the leader.
(If one player discards goods during loading, the discarded
goods will be available for the players who load after.)
What if the bank runs out of crew figures
or battery tokens?
In this case, look under the table. There should be enough
crew figures to fill every cabin and enough battery tokens to
fill every battery. (If you find there are not enough aliens to go
around, that might be because you forgot that your ship can
only have one alien of each type.)
Where can I get the electronic version?
Just about anywhere. Visit galaxytrucker.com to find download
links. If you have any other questions about the game, feel free
to send a message via that website's contact form.

FAQ
A Game by Vlaada Chvat il
Game & box cover art: Radim "Finder" Pech
Rulebook Illustrations: Tom Kucerovsk
Typesetting and graphic design: Filip Murmak
Translation: Jason Holt
Main playtester: Petr Murmak
Playtesters: Monca, Rumun, Ese, Yuyka, Peta, Karel,
Me2d, Gekon, Vazoun, Citron, Wild, and many others
from Brno Boardgames Club, Jirka, Petr, Martina, and
many others from Paluba Club, karel_danek, Ldnek,
Kveta, Marcela, Evicka, Lenka, Rychlk, Plema, Martuk,
Opick, Trpaslk, Davee, George, Herby, dilli, Patrik, and
many others from all the Bohemia, Moravia, and Slovakia.
Thanks.
 Czech Games Edition, August 2008. www.CzechGames.com



GAME NAME:
COUP

Coup Rules
Number of players: 3-6

OBJECT:
To be the only player with any influence cards left.

MATERIALS:
Deck of influence cards, bank of coins.

SET-UP:
Shuffle the cards and deal two to each player. Players should look at their cards but keep them
hidden from everyone else. Each player takes two coind from the bank as their starting wealth.

CARDS:
There are five different characters in the influence deck (three copies of each character). Each
of the five characters has one or more special abilities. The Duke (takes taxes and Blocks Foreign Aid),
the Assassin (forces one player to give up an Influence card), the Captain (steals two coins from
another player, Blocks stealing attempts), Ambassador (lets you swap or appear to swap your Influence
cards with new ones from the deck, Blocks stealing attempts), the Countessa (Blocks assassination
attempts).

PLAY:
Starting with the player to the left of the dealer and going clockwise, players take turns
performing one of the available actions.
1. Income: Take one coin from the bank. This cannot be Challenged or Blocked.
2. Foreign Aid: Take two coins from the bank. This cannot be Challenged but it can be Blocked by
the Duke.
3. Coup: Costs seven coins. Cause a player to give up an Influence card. Cannot be Challenged or
Blocked. If you start your turn with 10+ coins, you must take this action.
4. Taxes (the Duke): Take three coins from the bank. Can be Challenged.
5. Assassinate (the Assassin): Costs three coins. Force one player to give up an Influence card of
their choice. Can be Challenged. Can be Blocked by the Contessa.
6. Steal (the Captain): Take two coins from another player. Can be Challenged. Can be Blocked by
another Captain or an Ambassador.
7. Swap Influence (the Ambassador): Draw two Influence cards from the deck, look at them and
mix them with your current Influence card(s). Place two cards back in the deck and shuffle the
deck. Can be Challenged. Cannot be Blocked.
Blocking: If another player takes an action that can be Blocked, any other player may Block it by
claiming to have the proper character on one of their Influence cards. The acting player cannot perform
the action and takes no other action this turn. The acting player MAY choose to Challenge the Blocking
player. If they win the Challenge, the action goes through as normal.

CHALLENGE:
When the acting player declares their action, any other player may Challenge their right to
take the action. They are saying "I don't believe you have the proper character to do that." The acting
player now must prove they have the power to take the action or lose the Challenge. If they have the
right character, they reveal it and place the revealed card back in the deck. They then shuffle the deck
and draw a new card. The Challenging player has lost the Challenge. If the do NOT have the proper
character, they lose the Challenge.

LOSING A CHALLENGE:
Any player who loses a Challenge must turn one of their Influence cards face up
for all to see. If that is their last Influence card, they are out of the game.

LOSING AN INFLUENCE:
Any time a player loses an Influence card, THEY choose which of their cards to
reveal.



GAME NAME: SCYTHE

Stonemaier Games presents

GOAL:
The goal is to have the greatest fortune at the end of the game;
a typical winning fortune is around $75. You can accumulate
coins during the game, but you will earn most of them during
end-game scoring in the following three categories:
Every star token placed
Every territory controlled
Every 2 resources controlled
The amount of coins you earn depends on your level on the
Popularity Track. The higher your popularity, the more coins
you will earn. You can also get a few bonus coins based on
where you built structures.

DESIGNED BY:
JAMEY STEGMAIER

ART AND WORLDBUILDING BY JAKUB ROZALSKI

1-5 PLAYERS  115 MINUTES
Scythe is a board game set in an alternate-history 1920s.
It is a time of farming and war, broken hearts and rusted gears, innovation and valor.

BACKSTORY:
The ashes from the first Great War still darken the snow in 1920s Europa. The capitalistic city-state known simply as "The F actory,"
which fueled the war with heavily armored mechs, has closed its doors, drawing the atetntion of several nearby countries.
With characters from five factions converging onto a small but highly desired swath of land, who will gain fame and
fortune by establishing their empire as the leader of Eastern Europa?

OBJECT OF THE GAME:
In Scythe, each player represents a character attempting to
make their faction the richest and most powerful in Eastern
Europa. Players explore and conquer territory, enlist new
recruits, produce resources and workers, build structures,
and deploy monstrous mechs. A game of Scythe typically
begins with players building up their infrastructure,
exploring the world, then engaging each other in combat.
The game progresses as players place stars (achievements)
on the board, and it ends when a player places their 6th star
on the Triumph Track. You can earn a star for accomplishing
any of the following:
Complete all 6 upgrades
Deploy all 4 mechs
Build all 4 structures
Enlist all 4 recruits
Have all 8 workers on
the board
Reveal 1 completed
objective card
Win combat (up to 2 times)
Have 18 popularity
Have 16 power

QUICK REFERENCE GUIDE:
GAME BOARD:
1. Shuffle and place the encounter, combat, and objective cards on
their board spaces.
2. Shuffle factory cards and place as many as the number of players
+1 on the board face-down. Remove the rest from the game.
3. Randomly draw and place face-up one structure bonus tile at the
bottom of the Popularity Track.
4. Place an encounter token on each encounter space ().
5. Separate the resource tokens and coins into the supply.
6. Randomly deal a Faction Mat and a Player Mat to each player.
FACTION MATS
7. Start with the power position () and number of combat cards
( ) shown on your mat.
8. Place your faction character on your faction home base.
9. Place 1 worker on each of the two land-adjoined territories
adjacent to the home base.
10. Place 4 mechs on the mech spaces.
11. Place your 6 star tokens on your Faction Mat.
PLAYER MATS
12. Start with the popularity position () and gain the number of
objective cards () and coins ( ) shown on your mat.
13. Place the 6 technology cubes on the green boxes with black
squares ().
14. Place the 4 structures on their corresponding boxes.
15. Place the 4 recruit tokens on the circle bonus spaces.
16. Place the 6 workers on the red Produce action rectangles.
17. Place your action token next to your Player Mat.
18. The start player is the one with the lowest numbered Player Mat.
Play then proceeds clockwise.

TURN ORDER:
Each player takes a turn by placing the action token on the
corresponding section of the Player Mat. You may take the
top and/or bottom action (in that order). You must choose a
different section of your Player Mat from your previous turn.

TRIUMPH TRACK:
Place a star on the Triumph Track as soon as you complete one
of the requirements. Each achievement may only be awarded
once (note: there are two combat victory achievements). Once
you place a star, it cannot be lost. When a player places a sixth
star, the game immediately ends.

END GAME SCORING:
Gain coins for each star on the Triumph Track, each territory
controlled, and every two resources. The amount of coins for
each is based on your position on the popularity track. The
Factory counts as three territories.
Then gain coins based on the structure bonus tile (even if you
do not control the territory). For adjacent territory bonuses,
only count each adjacent territory once.
The player with the most coins wins. Break ties (in order) by:
number of units and structures, power, popularity, resources
owned, territories controlled, and stars placed.

TURN ORDER, TRIUMPH TRACK, AND END OF GAME:

CONTROL:
A territory is controlled by a player if it has only that player's
units on it or if it has its structure but no enemy units.
A territory with a structure and enemy units is controlled by
the enemy units' player. The enemy units' player does not
gain the structure's abilities.
Resources on a territory are controlled by the player who
controls that territory.

FACTORY ACTION SPACES:
Factory card action spaces do not give bonuses (Recruit,
Structure, etc.) that Player Mat spaces do. The factory Move
action allows one unit to move twice.

OBJECTIVES:
At any time, if you complete an objective on one of your cards,
place a star on the objective space of the Triumph Track and
discard the other objective(s).

CLARIFICATIONS:
RESOURCE: Food, wood, metal, or oil (not workers). You may only
use resources on territories you control to pay costs.
TERRITORY: A non-Home Base hex. The Home Base does not cont
as a territory for any game effects.
UNIT: A character, mech, or worker.

IMPORTANT CONCEPTS:

SETUP:
Quick reference guide created by Nersi Nikakhtar
TABLE OF CONTENTS
COMPONENTS
IMPORTANT CONCEPTS
TYPES OF UNITS
SETUP
GAMEPLAY
TOP-ROW ACTIONS
BOTTOM-ROW ACTIONS
FACTION ABILITIES
COMBAT
ENCOUNTERS
THE FACTORY
OBJECTIVES
ALLIANCES & BRIBES
PLACING STARS
GAME END AND SCORING
CHARACTERS
HIGHLIGHTED RULES

GLOBAL COMPONENTS:
1 quick-reference guide
5 player mats
1 game board
80 resource tokens
(20 each of food, metal, wood, and
oil, either as wooden tokensregular
Scytheor realistic tokensCollector's
and Art Connoisseur Editions)
80 cardboard coins
12 multiplier tokens
12 encounter tokens
6 structure bonus tiles
42 combat cards (yellow)
23 objective cards (beige)
28 encounter cards (green)
12 Factory cards (purple)
2 Power Dials
5 Riverwalk cards
5 quick-start cards
Promo Items
see note on page 32
DESIGNER'S NOTE: Why the name "Scythe"? A scythe is
both an instrument of farming and a weapon of
war, which perfectly encapsulates the combination
of those two elements in the game. Your workers rely
on the protection of your military just as much as
your empire depends on the resources they produce.
"Scythe" is pronounced like "sigh" and the soft "th"
in"smooth". +3 +7
+7 +3

FACTION COMPONENTS:
FACTION NORDIC SAXONY POLANIA CRIMEA RUSVIET
- 1 Faction Mat
- 1 action token
- 1 popularity token
- 1 power token
- 6 star tokens
- 4 structure tokens
- 4 recruit tokens
- 4 mech miniatures
- 1 character miniature
- 8 workers
- 6 technology cubes

IMPORTANT CONCEPTS:

HOME BASE:
You have a home base that serves as a starting point and as a place to retreat after losing
combat.
IT'S NOT A TERRITORY: A home base is not a territory, so by default you cannot move units, build
structures, or deploy mechs onto any home base, including your own.
EXPANSION FACTIONS: There are two home bases on the game board without corresponding
pieces. These are placeholders for expansion factions.
CONTROL
You control a territory if you have at least one unit there (a character, worker, or mech) OR
if you have a structure there with no enemy characters, workers, or mechs. Only one player
at a time can control a territory.

RESOURCES:
Resource tokens (wood, food, metal, and oil) remain on the board once produced. You may only spend resources from
territories you currently control.
SPEND RESOURCES FROM ANY TERRITORIES YOU CONTROL: You can spend resources on territories you control for actions related to
territories anywhere on the board. For example, you can spend 3 metal tokens you control on one or more territories to
deploy a mech on the same or a different territory (if you have a worker on that territory).
SUPPLY: When you spend a resource, remove it from the board and place it in the general supply at the side of the board.
When you produce or trade for a resource (details in the Top-Row Actions section, pages 12-13), move it from the supply
to the territory where it was produced. There are no limits to the number of resource tokens in the gameuse multiplier
tokens as needed.
WORKERS AREN'T RESOURCES. Resources are wood, food, metal, and oil. Workers are not resources.

TERRITORY:
A territory is a hex on the
board labeled with one of
the following terrain types:
FARM FOREST
PRIMARY TERRAIN TYPES
MOUNTAIN TUNDRA VILLAGE LAKE FACTORY
EXAMPLE OF RESOURCE CONTROL: In this image, the Nordic
faction controls each of the territories on which
it has one of its units or structures (blue pieces,
including the character miniature with the blue
base). It can spend any of the resources on those
territories. It cannot spend the metal tokens on the
territory on the bottom left because it does not have a
unit or structure there.
Each type of unit also has some unique traits that aren't
shared by the other unit types. These concepts will be
explained in detail later in the rules.

PLASTIC WOOD:
A visual cue in Scythe is that tokens that take part in combat are made out of plastic
(characters and mechs). All other tokens are made out of wood to show that they do not
take part in combat (workers, resources, and structures).
Characters can engage
in combat, can have
encounters, and (once per
game) gain a Factory card
if they end their movement
on the Factory. You are
represented on the board by
your character. You have been
sent on a mission by your
faction's leader to claim the
uncharted lands surrounding
the defunct Factory.
Mechs can engage in
combat and, when moving,
can transport any number
of workers. Mechs cannot
transport your character.
Mechs are built for war (and
for discouraging other factions
from engaging in war with
them), and they're big enough
that they can carry workers
within their iron shells.
Workers can produce
resources and more
workers, deploy mechs, and
build structures. These are
the people of the land who
have joined your cause to
build an empire for you.
Each of the three unit types in the gamecharacters,
mechs, and workersshare two key similarities:
They can move around the board (not over rivers or onto
lakes, by default).
They can transport any number of resource tokens.

TYPES OF UNITS:
BOARD SETUP
SETUP
OBJECTIVE CARDS (BEIGE): Shuffle
the objective cards and put
them on the board.
ENCOUNTER CARDS (GREEN):
Shuffle the encounter
cards and put them on
the board.
COMBAT CARDS (YELLOW): Shuffle
the combat cards and put
them on the board. If a
combat card would need to
be drawn from an empty
deck, first shuffle the
discard pile to create a new
deck. If both the deck and
discard pile are empty, no
cards are drawn.
FACTORY CARDS (PURPLE): Shuffle
the Factory cards and
randomly select X cards
face-down, where X is the
number of players plus 1.
Place those cards on the
board face-down and return
the rest of the Factory cards
to the box without looking
at them.
STRUCTURE BONUS TILE: Randomly select one of the structure
bonus tiles and place it face-up at the bottom of the
Popularity Track.
ENCOUNTER TOKENS (GREEN COMPASS): Place
1 encounter token on each territory
marked with an encounter symbol on
the board (11 total tokens).
RESOURCES AND COINS: Place the resource tokens (wood, oil, food,
and metal), coins, and multiplier tokens in a supply area
next to the board.
FACTION SELECTION:
Randomly shuffle the Faction Mats and Player Mats, then
deal 1 of each to each player. Each player should sit near
the home base for their faction with their Faction Mat
and Player Mat positioned in front of them; the seating
order should be Nordic, Rusviet, Crimea, Saxony, Polania
(Clockwise from top).
TRIUMPH TRACK
POPULARITY TRACK
POWER TRACK

STARTING CARDS AND TRACK POSITIONS:
Both the Faction Mat and Player Mat indicate your starting cards and track positions in the
boxes on the far right of each mat.
POWER TOKEN: Place your
power token ( ) on the
indicated level of the Power
Track (on the game board).
Power is the commodity you
will spend in combat.
COINS: Gain the indicated
amount of coins and place
them on your Faction Mat.
While the number of coins
you have during the game
is not hidden information,
you are never required
to reveal their total value
to other players. The
decisions you make in
Scythe are not impacted
by each of your opponent's
coin totals.

CHARACTER:
Place your character (miniature with the person & animal)
on your faction's home base.

WORKERS:
Place 1 worker on each of the territories connected to your
home base by land (a total of 2 workers).

COMBAT CARDS: Draw the
indicated number of
combat cards. The number
of combat cards you have
is public information,
but the content of those
cards is kept secret from
opponents.

OBJECTIVE CARDS: Draw the
indicated number of
objective cards. The
content of those cards
is kept secret from
opponents. After all
players have drawn their
objective cards, return the
objective deck to the board.
POPULARITY TOKEN: Place your popularity token (heart) on the
indicated level of the Popularity Track on the game board.
ACTION TOKEN: Place your
action token next to
the Player Mat.
DESIGNER'S NOTE: The higher-numbered Player Mats offer
slightly more lucrative starting track positions than the
others, as those players are more likely to have 1 fewer
turn by the end of the game than the player who goes first.

STARTING PLAYER:
The player with the lowest number in the label on their
Player Mat will go first. Play proceeds clockwise from there.
PLAYER MAT
Your Player Mat is where you'll be choosing actions during the game.
TECHNOLOGY CUBES: Put 6 technology cubes on your
Player Mat on the green boxes that have a black
square in the bottom right corner.
EXAMPLE
STRUCTURE TOKENS: Your 4
structure tokens (wooden
buildings: Armory,
Monument, Mine, and
Mill) go on top of the
corresponding boxes.
Each player has the same 4
structures.
RECRUIT TOKENS: Your 4
recruit tokens (cylinders)
go on the circular spaces
on the bottom row of the
Player Mat.
WORKERS: Your remaining 6
workers (meeples) go on
the rectangles above the
Produce action.

FACTION MAT:
Your Faction Mat is where you keep your mechs, stars, and coins. Each Faction Mat also shows a special ability in the
upper right corner.
STARS: Place your 6 star tokens at the upper
left near the faction emblem.
MECHS: Place your 4 mech
miniatures on top of the 4
mech/character abilities.
Do not put tokens on top
of the Recruit One-Time
Bonuses (bottom left
corner)you'll gain these
benefits when enlisting
recruits during the game.

QUICK-START CARD:
We recommend that you don't try to teach every little
rule to new players. Instead, give each player a quickstart
card. This card contains key information about
units on one side, and the other side covers broad
concepts and gives players something specific to do for
their first five turns.
Your first game of Scythe isn't about devising a
masterful plan or understanding every little rule. Just
jump in and start pushing buttons to see how things
work, referring to the rules when necessary.

RIVERWALK CARD:
The riverwalk cardsone per playerare a reminder
as to which factions have the ability to cross into each
home territory if they unlock the Riverwalk mech
ability, as each Riverwalk ability is slightly different.
This ability is explained for each faction on
pages 15  17.

GAMEPLAY:
Scythe uses an ongoing action-selection mechanism (no rounds or phases). Players take
turns one after another until a player places their 6th star on the board, immediately
ending the game.
Thus, you may take a single action, both actions (from top
to bottom), or neither action (but you must still move your
action token). You may use resources gained from the toprow
action to pay for the bottom-row action. Also, you may
complete an objective card during your turn (see Objective
section, page 26).
The costs (red boxes) and benefits (green boxes) on your
Player Mat are shown by the number of empty spaces before
the action is taken. When taking an action, first pay the
cost, then gain as much or as little of the benefit as you
wish. You may only take an action once on your turn, not
multiple times.
After you've completed your turn (or as you're finalizing
your decision on a bottom-row actionit is crucial for
turns to overlap in this manner to keep the game moving
at a steady pace), the next person in clockwise order takes
their turn.
On your turn, do the following in sequential order:
1. Place your action token on a different section of your
Player Mat than where it was on your previous turn.
2. Take the top-row action on that section once (optional).
3. Take the bottom-row action on that section once (optional).
TOP-ROW ACTIONS
BOTTOM-ROW ACTIONS
BOLSTER ACTION PRODUCE ACTION MOVE ACTION TRADE ACTION
BOLSTER ACTION
(with structure below it)
UPGRADE ACTION
(with recruit bonus on
the right)
UPGRADE ACTION DEPLOY ACTION BUILD ACTION ENLIST ACTION

TOP-ROW ACTIONS:
The top-row actions appear in a different order on each Player Mat, though each action is identical. The Player Mat visuals
and the default costs and benefits explained in this section are based on the starting position of each Player Mat.
MOVE
Do one of the following ("/" means
"or"):
MOVE: Move up to 2 different units
you control (character, worker, or
mech) from one territory (or home
base) to one adjacent territory.
Move one, then move the other.
GAIN COIN(S): Gain $1.
Here are some important notes about how movement works:
RESOURCES AND WORKERS: Units may pick up and drop off any
number of resource tokens during a Move action.
MECHS: In addition to resources, your mechs can pick up
and drop off any number of your workers during a Move
action. If they do, this does not count as movement for
the workers, just the mech. So you could transport some
workers on a mech, and then one of those workers could
move on its own. You could also use part of your Move
action to move a worker onto a territory with a mech,
then move the mech while carrying the worker.
RIVERS AND LAKES: By default, units may not move across rivers
or onto lakes. This rule is broken by some mech abilities
(see Mech abilities for Polania and Nordic, pages 16-17).
RIVER: A river is a body of water on the border between two
land territories.
LAKE: A lake is a body of water comprised of an entire
territory hex. It extends from the hex to any adjacent
shoreline. Thus, in the example shown here, if a player
has a special lake-movement ability, they could move
from any of the surrounding territories onto the lake.
TUNNELS: For the purposes of the Move action for any unit, all
territories with the tunnel icon ( ) are considered to be
adjacent to each other.
RIVER
TUNNEL LAKE
MOVING INTO OPPONENT-CONTROLLED TERRITORIES:
CONTROLLED BY WORKERS
 If your character or mech move into a territory
controlled by an opponent's workers (and no other
units), its movement ends (even if you have a mech
ability that would allow it to move further). Each of
the opponent's workers on that territory immediately
retreats to their faction's home base, leaving behind
any resource tokens. You lose 1 popularity for each of
their workers you forced to retreatthey're not happy
with you for forcing them off their land (in the case
that you cannot reduce your popularity any further,
the workers are still forced to retreat).
 Your workers cannot move by themselves into
territories controlled by opponent workers.

CONTROLLED BY A STRUCTURE:
 Any unit can move into a territory controlled only by
a structure. The player who controls the unit now also
controls the territory.

CONTROLLED BY CHARACTER AND/OR MECHS:
 If your character or mech move into a territory
controlled by an opponent's character and/or mechs,
its movement ends (even if you have a mech ability
that would allow it to move further). The opponent
still temporarily controls that territory. After you've
completed all Move actions, if any of your mechs or
your character share a territory with an opponent's
character or mechs, combat happens (see Combat
section, pages 22-23).
 Your workers cannot move by themselves into or out
of territories controlled by opponent characters and/
or mechs.
HOME BASE: By default, you may not use the Move action
to move any unit from the board into any home base
(including yours).
ENCOUNTERS: If you move your character into a territory
with an encounter token, their movement ends and they
cannot move again this turn. After resolving all combats
for this turn, if your character is still in such a territory,
discard the encounter token and resolve the encounter (see
Encounters, page 24).
NO LIMIT: There is no limit to the number of same-faction
units that can be on a territory.
STRATEGY TIP: While producing with workers will provide the bulk of most players' resources, trading has some
benefits over producing that should not be underestimated. For example, trading for a desired resource
is sometimes preferable to moving a worker to a territory that provides that resource. The action that you
would have spent on movement can now be used for something more productive. Trading also allows players
to access resources that aren't available in their homeland.

BOLSTER:
Pay the cost ($1) and gain one of the following:
POWER: Increase your power by 2 on the Power Track. Power is the commodity you will spend
in combat.
COMBAT CARD(S): Draw 1 combat card. Combat cards are used to augment the power you spend
in combat (you may spend up to 1 combat card per character/mech in combat). If a combat
card would need to be drawn from an empty deck, first shuffle the discard pile to create a
new deck. If there is no discard pile, no cards are drawn.
TRADE
Pay the cost ($1) and gain one of the following:
RESOURCES: Gain any 2 resource tokens (any combination of oil, metal, food, and/or wood)
and place them on any territory you control with at least one worker on it. You may not take
the trade action to pay for resources if all of your workers are on your home base.
POPULARITY: Increase your popularity by 1 on the Popularity Track. Popularity is a commodity
used in Encounters, and it determines your scoring multiplier at the end of the game.

PRODUCE:
Pay the cost (depending on what is shown on all exposed red rectangles before taking the
Produce action), choose up to 2 different territories you control, and all workers on those
territories may produce.
On the territories you selected for production, each worker may produce 1 token. The
resource token is placed on the territory where it was produced. If a worker produces
another worker (by producing on a village), after paying the Produce cost, pick up the
leftmost worker of the Produce action on your Player Mat and place it on the village.
It is possiblealbeit very rarethat players may find themselves in a position where they cannot take any actions (if they
last took a Move action and have no coins, resources, power, or popularity). If that happens, the player must take a "dead
turn" where they choose another section of the Player Mat without taking any of the actions there. We recommend being
thrifty with coins early in the game to prevent this from happening.
EXAMPLE: If you
choose to produce
on two territories
(a farm with 1
worker and a
mountain with
2 workers), you
would produce 1
food on the farm
and 1 or 2 metal
on the mountain.
TERRAIN TYPE WHAT IT PRODUCES
MOUNTAIN METAL
TUNDRA OIL
FARM FOOD
FOREST WOOD
LAKE
VILLAGE WORKER
FACTORY
PAYMENT IS REQUIRED: As is the case with any action, you must be able to pay the full cost to take
the Produce action. If you don't have the coins, popularity, and/or power, you must take
other actions instead.
NO LIMIT: Any number of resource tokens or workers can be on a territory. There are no
limits to the number of resource tokens in the game. If necessary, place a multiplier token
next to resource tokens on the board.
WORKERS ARE PERMANENT: Once you have a worker on the board, you cannot return it to your
Player Mat.
The bottom-row actions are in the same order on all Player Mats, but the costs and benefits vary. The Player Mat visuals and
the default costs and benefits explained in this section are based on the starting position of each Player Mat.
OVERLAPPING TURNS: Usually when a player starts to take the
bottom-row action (which isn't interactive but may take a few
seconds to figure out), the next player can start to take their
turn.
COINS: Most of the bottom actions give you at least one coin
when you pay to take that action. We recommend that players
take the coins before implementing the main focus of the
action so they don't forget to gain those coins. A player may
choose not to take the coins (e.g., if coins interfere with their
objective).
COMPLETING ACTIONS: Eventually you may "complete" a bottomrow
action (e.g., with the Upgrade action, at some point you
may have nothing more to upgrade). After that point you may
continue to pay the cost of the action to gain the coins (and
the recruit bonus, if applicable).
RECRUITS: Each of the bottom actions has a Recruit Ongoing
Bonus (green circle). If it is exposed, it rewards a player when
they or adjacent opponents take this action. See the Enlist
section for details (page 20).
BOTTOM-ROW ACTIONS
UPGRADE
Upgrading improves the efficiency of the infrastructure in
your growing empire. The resource used to upgrade is oil.
To upgrade, pay the cost, pick up a technology cube from
any green box on your Player Mat, and place it on any empty
red box with bracketed borders. Red boxes with solid black
borders are off limits for upgrades.
EXAMPLE: You decide that you want to be able to
Produce on 3 territories instead of 2 (ignore the Mill
for this example), and you want to decrease the cost
of enlisting a recruit by 1 food. By taking the Upgrade
action, in addition to paying the oil cost and gaining
the coin benefit, pick up any technology cube from a
green box (in this case, the Produce action benefit)
and move it to any red box with bracketed borders
(in this case, the Enlist action cost).

DEPLOY:
You can deploy mechs (miniatures) to protect your workers,
expand your empire, and add new abilities to your character
and other mechs. The resource used to deploy mechs is metal.
To deploy a mech, pay the cost, choose any mech on your
Faction Mat, and place that mech on a territory you control
with at least one worker on it. You can't deploy mechs on lakes
(even if your faction has mech abilities allowing your mechs to
move onto lakes).
From now on, your character and all mechs (not your workers)
gain the ability on the Faction Mat that was under the mech
miniature. These abilities vary from faction to faction.
SPEED: Your character and mechs may move one additional
territory when moving. If any of those units move into a
territory containing an opponent's character, mech, or
worker, their movement ends and they cannot move again
this turn. Moving from one tunnel to another still counts
as 1 move, so with this ability you could move an additional
territory before or after moving through a tunnel. Your
mechs can pick up and drop off resources and workers
in the middle of a Move action when they have the Speed
ability.
SAXONY
RIVERWALK: Your character and mechs can move across rivers
onto forests and mountains.
UNDERPASS: For the purposes of Move actions for your
character and mechs, mountains you control and all
tunnels are considered to be adjacent to each other. For
example, if your mech is on a mountain, it can move from
that mountain to (a) any other mountain you control or (b)
any tunnel (or your Mine).
DISARM: Before you engage in combat on a territory with
a tunnel or your Mine, the combating opponent loses 2
power. This loss of power is reflected on the Power Track.
You may do this once per combat, not once per unit.
RIVERWALK: Your character and mechs can move across rivers
onto forests and mountains.
SEAWORTHY: Your character and mechs can move to and from
lakes and retreat onto adjacent lakes (you may still also
retreat those units to your home base). This allows for
lake hexes to be treated the same as other territories for
movement. If a mech transports workers onto a lake (during
a Move action or when retreating) or if a character or mech
transports resources onto a lake, you may not leave those
workers or resources on the lake after moving off of it, nor
may a worker move off of the lake without the assistance of
the mech. Lakes are territories, so if two factions have a lakemovement
ability, it's possible for combat to happen on a
lake. You cannot build a structure or deploy a mech on a lake.
ARTILLERY: Before you engage in combat, you may pay 1 power
to force the combating opponent to lose 2 power. This loss
of power is reflected on the Power Track. You may do this
once per combat, not once per unit.
SPEED: Your character and mechs may move one additional
territory per movement. See page 15 for full details.
NORDIC
PEOPLE'S ARMY: In combat where you have at least 1 worker,
you may play one additional combat card. You still require
a character or mech to participate in combat. For example,
if you have 2 mechs and 3 workers in combat, you may play
up to 3 combat cards (1 for each of the mechs and 1 because
you have at least 1 worker).
SPEED: Your character and mechs may move one additional
territory per movement. See page 15 for full details.
RUSVIET
RIVERWALK: Your character and mechs can move across rivers
onto farms and villages.
TOWNSHIP: For the purposes of Move actions for your
character and mechs, villages you control and the Factory
are considered to be adjacent to each other. For example,
if your mech is on a village, it can move from that village to
(a) any other village you control or (b) the Factory.
BOTTOM-ROW ACTIONS continued
RIVERWALK: Your character and mechs can move across rivers
onto farms and tundra.
WAYFARE: Your character and mechs may move from a
territory or home base to any inactive faction's home
base or your own regardless of the distance. An "inactive
faction" is any faction not currently in the game, including
the expansion factions. Normally players may not move
into any home base, but this is an exception to that rule.
SCOUT: Before you engage in combat, steal one of the
opponent's combat cards at random and add it to your
hand. You may do this once per combat, not once per unit.
SPEED: Your character and mechs may move one additional
territory per movement. See page 15 for full details.
RIVERWALK: Your character and mechs can move across rivers
onto villages and mountains.
SUBMERGE: Your character and mechs may move to and from lakes
and move from any lake to another (similar to tunnel movement,
but with lakes). If a mech transports workers onto a lake or if a
character or mech transports resources onto a lake, you may not
leave those workers or resources on the lake after moving off of
it, nor may a worker move off of the lake without the assistance of
the mech. Lakes are territories, so if two factions have a lakemovement
ability, it's possible for combat to happen on a lake.
You cannot build a structure or deploy a mech on a lake.
CRIMEA
POLANIA
CAMARADERIE: You do not lose popularity when forcing an
opponent's workers to retreat after winning combat as the
aggressor. This applies any time on your turn when your
character or mechs force an opponent's workers to retreat
after combat.
SPEED: Your character and mechs may move one additional
territory per movement. See page 15 for full details.

BUILD:
You can build structures (structure tokens) to enhance your actions, control territories,
and get end-game bonuses. The resource used to build structures is wood.
To build a structure, pay the cost, pick up any structure from your Player Mat, and place it
on a territory you control with at least one worker on it.
LIMIT 1 PER TERRITORY: Only 1 structure can be built on each territory. So if you're the first
player to build a structure on a specific territory, neither you nor any opponent may
build another structure there.
STRUCTURE CONTROL: Opponents can't use your structure abilities. You always get the abilities
from your structures even if you don't control the territories they're on (except for the
Mill--you can't Produce on the Mill's territory if you don't control that territory).
TERRITORY CONTROL: A territory with one of your structures on it is under your control even
if you have no units there. However, if an opponent's unit is on a territory with your
structure, that territory is under their control.
PERMANENCE: Structures cannot be destroyed or moved.
FACTORY: You may build on the Factory territory.
PLACES YOU CAN'T BUILD: Your home base isn't a territory, so you can't build there. You also
can't build structures on lakes.
ONGOING BONUS: The benefit revealed by removing a structure from your Player Mat is an
additional benefit you will gain when taking the top-row action directly above it in the
future.
ARMORY: Whenever you take
the Trade action, also gain
1 power.
MONUMENT: Whenever you take
the Bolster action, also gain 1
popularity.
MILL: Whenever you take
the Produce action, the
territory with the Mill may
count as an extra (bonus)
territory for production.
The Mill will produce as if
it were a worker. If there
are actual workers on the
Mill territory, they may also
produce resources.
MINE: The Mine acts as a
tunnel that only you can use.
You may move units to and
from your Mine as if it is a
tunnel (even if an opponent
controls the territory the
Mine is on). Unlike the other
structures, this is an ongoing
ability associated with all
unit movement.
END-GAME BONUS: At the end of the game, players will gain coins for achieving the
goals shown on the structure bonus tile that was randomly selected during
setup. You gain this bonus even if you don't control the territories the structures
are on. This bonus represents how property values have strengthened your
expanding empire.
The 6 structure bonus tiles are as follows:
Number of lakes adjacent to
your structures. Only count
each lake once.
Number of tunnel
territories adjacent to your
structures. Only count each
tunnel once. A Mine does
not count as a tunnel for
this purpose, and rivers do
not break adjacency.
Number of encounters
adjacent to your structures.
Only count each encounter
once. These count whether
or not the encounter tokens
are still there. Rivers do not
break adjacency.
Number of tunnel
territories with your
structures on them. A Mine
does not count as a tunnel
for this purpose.
Number of your structures
in a row (any continuous
straight line is fine; only
count the longest row of
structures you have; rivers
do not break continuity).
Number of farms and
tundras with your structures
on them.
EXAMPLE: The structure
bonus for this game
is for the number of
lakes adjacent to your
structures. If you had
the two structures
positioned as shown
here, you would gain
coins for 4 lakes (a
total of $6). You gain
those coins even if
you do not control
the territories your
structures are on.

ONE-TIME BONUS: To enlist a recruit, pay the cost, pick up a
recruit token from any section of your Player Mat, place
it on any open Recruit One-Time Bonus space on your
Faction Mat, and immediately gain the depicted bonus.
This represents what your new recruit is immediately
contributing to your forces. The token remains there
permanentlyit can't be moved.
The four one-time bonuses are:
Gain 2 power
Gain 2 coins
Gain 2 popularity
Draw 2 combat cards

ENLIST:
You can enlist new recruits (cylindrical tokens) to join your
forces. The resource used to enlist recruits is food.
ONGOING BONUS: In addition to the one-time bonus, each
recruit gives you a Recruit Ongoing Bonus related to the
action from which you selected the recruit token (the bonus
in the circle). This represents a skill the recruit brings to
your force.
For the rest of the game, whenever you or the player to your
immediate left or right (these players are shown in the icon
in the red circle) take the bottom-row action in the section
of the Player Mat from which the recruit was taken, you
may gain the specified bonus. Top-row actions or a similar
action on a Factory card (see Factory section, page 25) do
not count.

PLAYER ORDER: If more than one player would gain a Recruit
Ongoing Bonus, the active player goes first, followed by
the player to their left, then the player on their right. If
one of those players places their 6th star as a result, the
game immediately ends (see Game End and Scoring,
page 28).

PROCLAMATION: You must announce when you take bottomrow
actions so adjacent players know to check for
Recruit Ongoing Bonuses.

TWO-PLAYER RULES: In a 2-player game,whenever your
opponent takes an action that would give you a Recruit
Ongoing Bonus, you only gain it once.
EXAMPLE: Whenever the blue (Nordic)
player OR the player to the left or
right of the Nordic player takes
the Build action, the Nordic player
gains 1 popularity, which is in the
green circle.
Each faction has a special ability indicated at the upper right of the Faction Mat.
RUSVIET (RELENTLESS): You may choose the same section on your Player Mat as the
previous turn(s).
The Rusviets push their people hard, day after day, to achieve their ultimate goal. While
other factions let their infrastructure take a break from turn to turn, the Rusviet faction
may choose the same section of their Player Mat as the previous turn(s). This ability
also applies to a Factory card if you have one (see Factory section).
CRIMEA (COERCION): Once per turn, you may spend 1 combat card as if it were any
1 resource token.
The Crimean faction has a longstanding tradition of selling information to the highest
bidder. They may spend 1 combat card per turn as if it were a resource to pay for
something (1 combat card = any 1 resource token, regardless of the number on the
combat card). Combat cards are still worth nothing at the end of the game.
NORDIC (SWIM): Your workers may move across rivers.
Nordic workers are accomplished swimmers who refuse to complain even when wading
through the coldest of waters. They may move across rivers onto any type of terrain
(except lakes). This ability applies only to workers, not the character and mechs.
POLANIA (MEANDER): Pick up to 2 options per encounter card.
Thanks to Anna's charismatic bear companion, Wojtek, the pair tend to stretch short
encounters into longer adventures. Instead of picking just 1 option per encounter card,
the Polanian faction may choose up to 2 different options per encounter card in any
order. The benefit from the first selected option may be used to pay the cost for the
second selected option. Only one encounter card is drawn.
SAXONY (DOMINATE): There is no limit to the number of stars you can place from completing
objectives or winning combat.
Saxony's methodical approach to conquering the eastern lands surrounding the
Factory is all about asserting force and completing specific missions. The Saxon faction
may complete both of their objective cards (they don't discard the second card after
achieving the first), and they are not limited to 2 combat victory stars. If Saxony has
available stars, after winning combat, they must place the star.
FACTION ABILITIES
DESIGNER'S NOTE: One of the subtle benefits of some of these faction abilities is that they
help to teach and remind players of the global rules of Scythe...by breaking those rules.
For example, when you read that the Rusviet faction can choose the same section of their
Player Mat on subsequent turns, you also learn that under normal circumstances, you
can't choose the same section twice in a row. In a game with lots of rules to remember, I
found that these subtle reminders really help.
Combat may happen at the end of a player's Move action (after all units have moved but
before the player takes a bottom-row action). If that player's character and/or mechs share
a territory with an opponent's character and/or mechs, combat occurs. It's possible for
this to happen on multiple territories; in that case, the active player (the attacker) chooses
the order in which these combats occur.
Combat happens only between the two players whose units share a territory, either of
whom can gain a star for winning the combat. Other players may try to influence the
combating players by bribing them with coins (see
Alliances and Bribes, page 26).
NO REQUIREMENTS: You may initiate combat even if you have 0
power and/or 0 popularity.
ATTACKER ADVANTAGE: If the attacking player has a mech ability
that impacts combat, they use that ability first, followed by
the defending player. Also, if combat results in a tie, the
attacking player wins.
SELECT POWER
Simultaneously and secretly select a number on your Power
Dial (align the number with the icon at the top right).
That is the amount of power you will spend, so you cannot
choose a number higher than the amount of power you
currently have on the Power Track. The track goes up to 16
but you can only spend up to 7 power on your Power Dial.
ADD COMBAT CARD(S) (OPTIONAL): By default, for each of your units
involved in the current combat (character and/or mechs),
you may tuck 1 combat card from your hand behind the
Power Dial. You may do this even if you select 0 power on
your Power Dial.
The number of combat cards you have in hand is public
information, but during combat you may conceal whether
or not you've used any of those cards. The combat deck
contains the following cards:
COMBAT
DESIGNER'S NOTE: You might be surprised by how few combats happen in
a game of Scythe, especially given the universal presence of mechs in
Jakub's art. However, if you look at all of the illustrations, you'll notice
that very few of the mechs are actually fighting. In that way, Scythe is
just as much about the threat of combat as it is actual combat. If your
neighbor has built up a big pool of power and combat cards, you're less
likely to attack them. Similarly, you might position workers on key
territories to dissuade more aggressive players from attacking you there
due to the loss of popularity if they win. It is this tension that exemplifies
the core theme of Scythe: the intersection of farming and war.
POWER DIAL ASSEMBLY
Assemble your
power dial by
placing the
enclosed plastic
rivets through the
punched out holes.

REVEAL:
Both players reveal their Power Dials and selected combat cards simultaneously. The value provided by any combat cards
provides an additional bonus to the power you spend from the Power Track as indicated on your Power Dial.
The player with the highest total power wins the combat (ties go to the attacking player). Both players then pay the amount
of power they selected on their Power Dials, and they discard any combat cards they used face-up (you don't adjust the
Power Track for combat cardsthey're just a temporary boost).
WINNER: The winner gains (or maintains) control of the
territory and all resource tokens on it. The winner also
places 1 star token in the combat space of the Triumph
Track (see Placing Stars, page 27) if they haven't already
placed 2 stars for combat victories. If the winner was the
attacker, they lose 1 popularity for each worker they forced
to retreat by initiating and winning combat. Also, if there
was an encounter token on the territory and the winner has
a character there, they now perform the encounter.
LOSER: The loser must retreat all of their unitsmechs,
characters, and workersfrom the combat territory to
their home base (pick up those units and put them down on
their home base). All resources those units were carrying
remain on the territory and are now under the control of
the winner. If the loser revealed at least 1 power on the
dial or through combat cards, they gain 1 combat card as
they retreat.
LIMITED STARS AND GAME END: Each player can gain a maximum
of 2 stars for winning combat (with the exception of the
Saxon player, who can gain unlimited combat victory stars),
but they may still engage in future combats after they've
achieved those 2 stars. If your 6th star is placed but you still
have a combat remaining on your turn, the game ends and
any units you moved to initiate that combat will move back
to the territory from whence they came.
BATTLE IN A LAKE: Lake battles can happen between factions
like Polania and Nordic that have activated lake-related
mech abilities. If a mech transporting workers is attacked
while on a lake and the attacker wins combat, the attacking
player loses 1 popularity for each of those workers (they are
forced to retreat with the mech to their home base).
EXAMPLE: John takes a Move action, first moving
his character onto an unoccupied farm, then
moving a mech carrying 2 workers onto a
territory controlled by Sandra. Sandra has her
character, a mech, a worker, and 3 food tokens
on that territory.
John has 10 power and Sandra has 4 (this is
shown on the Power Track on the board). John
turns his dial to select 7 power. He has one
combat unit (the mech), so he can add 1 combat
card from his hand, but he chooses not to do so.
Sandra decides to spend 4 power on her Power
Dial. She has both her character and a mech on
the territory, so she can spend up to 2 combat
cards if she wants to. She chooses to just play a
3-power card and tucks it behind her Power Dial.
When they've both finalized their decisions, they
reveal their Power Dials at the same time. Sandra
groansshe tied John's total power (7 to 7), but
attackers win ties!
So John takes over the territory and the 3 food,
and Sandra's units retreat back to her home
base. John loses 1 popularity because, as the
attacker, he forced 1 worker to retreat. John also
places a combat victory star on the board.
Sandra's only compensation is that she gets to
draw a combat card since she revealed at least 1
power on the dial or through combat cards.
STRATEGY TIP: Just because an opponent has a lot more power than you doesn't necessarily mean they'll
win in combat against you. They don't know how much power you will spend or the amount of power
your combat cards will add (combat cards aren't worth anything at the end of the game, so spend them
early and often). The puzzle of combat is outwitting your opponent, especially when they think they're
going to win.
As your character treks across Eastern Europa, they
will encounter a number of local people and situations.
Each encounter will present you with three options to
determine how you want to interact with the people. The
choice you make will often impact the peoples' view of you,
represented in the game by your popularity.
When you move your character onto a territory with an
encounter token on it ( ), their movement ends and
they cannot move again this turn. When your Move action
is completely over and you've resolved all combats (but
before you take a bottom-row action, if applicable), discard
the encounter token and draw an encounter card. Only
characters will trigger an encounter.

ENCOUNTERS:
Show the art to the other players and read the thematic text (the text in all caps) out
loud. Then read through the various costs and benefits on the options and choose one (you
must choose one and pay the cost if applicable, though you may gain as much of the benefit
as you'd like). After you make your selection, discard the encounter card to the bottom of
the encounter deck face-down.
REQUIRED COST AND OPTIONAL BENEFIT: If you don't have popularity or coins to pay for certain
options, those options aren't available. You may gain as much of the benefit as you like
(e.g., if a benefit would give you 2 metal and 1 worker but you don't want the worker, you
can just gain the 2 metal).
BENEFIT LOCATION: Any resources, structures, mechs, or workers you gain from the encounter
card go on the same territory as your character (i.e., where the encounter took place).
ISOLATED COST AND BENEFIT: If an encounter card instructs you to gain something or perform an
action, you do not pay any additional costs or gain additional benefits beyond those on the
encounter card, nor do you trigger any Recruit Ongoing Bonuses.
COMBAT: If a character moves onto a territory with an encounter token and an opponent's
mech, thus initiating combat, the encounter only happens after the character wins combat.
Otherwise the encounter token remains on the territory.
NUMBER: The number in the upper left corner is just for referencing the card for questions
posted on places like BoardGameGeek.com or stonemaiergames.com.
DESIGNER'S NOTE: We made a specific design decision with the beautifully illustrated
encounter cards: Rather than tell the players what they're seeing through a label or
flavor text, we'll let you use your eyes to see the scene you've stumbled upon. There's
often a lot happening in these scenes (it's usually not just one specific thing that's
happening), and the three options explain the various ways in which you can act.
Encounter cards are shown to all players when they're drawn, so your gaming group
can integrate as much or as little of the story into the way they play Scythe as they like.
We're giving you the same visual freedom you'd experience if you stumbled upon these
scenes in real life rather than restricting you to the limitations of flavor textafter all, a
picture is worth a thousand words.
The Factory is the centerpiece of the Scythe board. It is a place of technological innovation
and untapped power. Unlike most other territories, the Factory does not produce any
resources. At the end of the game, the Factory is worth a total of 3 territories (instead of
just 1) to the player who controls it.
When your Move action is completely finished (after winning combat if necessary), if your
character is on the Factory for the first time this game, look through the Factory cards on
the board. You must choose one card and return the rest to the board.
The first player to look at those cards will see cards equal to the number of players +1; each
subsequent player to visit the Factory with their character will see one fewer card. It's good
to get there first.

FACTORY CARDS:
Each Factory card is the equivalent of a fifth section of your Player Mat (place it next to
your Player Mat).
USING FACTORY ACTIONS: The Factory card is treated as any other section on your Player Mat. On
your turn, you may place your action token on the Factory card and take one or both actions
(starting with the top-row action if you choose to take both).
SEPARATE FROM PLAYER MAT BONUSES: Even if the Factory card action does something similar to
another action on your Player Mat, they're completely independent of one another. So you
get neither Recruit Ongoing Bonuses, Structure bonuses, nor coins from similar actions
on your Player Mat.
MOVE: All Factory cards have a bottom-row Move action. It's a little different than a standard
Move action, as it says, "Move one unit up to two times within the same Move action."
CONSISTENT WITH OTHER RULES: All other rules for movement still apply, especially those
that say that the entire Move action ends if your character moves onto a territory
with an encounter token or a character/mech moves onto a territory occupied by an
opponent's unit(s).
MINE: If you have a Mine, you may move through the Mine with this Move action.
SPEED: If you've unlocked the Speed mech ability, one of your mechs or your character
may move up to 3 territories with this Move action.
ONE-CARD LIMIT: You may have at most one Factory card (the one you choose the first time your
character goes to the Factory).
PERMANENT SELECTION: Your selection is permanentyou may not switch your Factory card for
another card if your character ends a future Move action on the Factory.

THE FACTORY:
STRATEGY TIP: Don't underestimate the power of being able to move every turn. Without a
Factory card, you can only move once every other turn, but once you get that card, you
become much more nimble and responsive than players without that capability.
EXAMPLE: This Factory
card allows you to
pay 1 popularity to
Enlist a recruit OR
perform an Upgrade
(or skip the top-row
action). Then you
may Move any one
unit up to two times.
Each player starts the game with 2 objective cards that are kept secret from
the other players. You may reveal a completed objective card during your own
turn before or after you complete a top- or bottom-row action. If you do,
place 1 star token on the objective space of the Triumph Track and discard
the card along with your other objective to the bottom of the objective deck.
You can only achieve 1 objective star, unless you're the Saxon player, who can
achieve up to 2 objective stars.
You may wait to reveal your completed objective if you wish, but you must
meet the entire objective requirements at the time you reveal it.

OBJECTIVES:

ALLIANCES AND BRIBES:
DESIGNER'S NOTE: It may seem a little odd that each player has 2 objective cards but
may only complete one of them. There are a few reasons for this. The first is that the
alternative would be to have each player draw 2 cards at the beginning of the game and
keep 1. However, I prefer not to ask players to make decisions before the game begins,
as it makes the game more welcoming to new players and gives experienced players
more freedom depending on how the game starts to play out. The second is that it
gives players the flexibility to change strategies mid-game. Maybe you were pursuing
one strategy, but that strategy didn't end up working out. No problemyou still have
another objective card to use.
Players may make informal agreements (e.g., "I won't attack you this turn if you don't
attack me next turn"). The only tangible items that may be exchanged are coins. In
tournament play, coins may not be exchanged for deals or alliances.
You can't negotiate your way out of a combat that has already begunthat is, if a player
moves their character and/or mechs onto a territory you control with your character and/
or mechs, at the end of their Move action, the two of you must engage in combat (you can't
pay them off at that point, though you could try to influence the outcome). Agreements
made between players are not enforceable.
When you reach a pinnacle of empire building, your faction rewards you with a star. Stars
are worth coins at the end of the game.
Here are the ways to place stars, as shown on the Triumph Track:
Complete all 6 upgrades
Deploy all 4 mechs
Build all 4 structures
Enlist all 4 recruits
Have all 8 workers on the
board
Reveal 1 completed
objective card
Win combat (up to 2 times)
Have 18 popularity
Have 16 power
When you achieve one of these goals, you must place a star on the appropriate space on the
Triumph Track. You cannot lose a star after you've placed it. For example, if you place a
star for reaching 18 popularity and you later drop below 18, the star remains on the track.
By default, each player may complete each of these goals exactly one time. Having a star on
a goal does not prevent other players from placing their stars on the same goal.
PL ACING STARS
STRATEGY TIP: You can't place more than 6 stars, so it's
generally better to focus on completing 6 specific goals
than trying to do a little of everything.
EXAMPLE: If you have 10 popularity, you will earn
$4 for every star you placed, $3 for each territory
you control, and $2 for every 2 resource tokens
you control. If you have 18 popularity, you score
within the 13-17 popularity level.
The game immediately ends when a player places their 6th star token, even if they have other things they could do that
turn or other things would happen afterwards.

VARIANT:

DELAY OF GAME: Because of the various end-game scoring
categories and their connection to popularity, it's
difficult for players to determine who is in the lead (this
is intentional). However, it is possible for a player to
interrupt the game to calculate the final score for each
player as they plan out their next few moves. That's not fun
for anyone. The Delay of Game variant says that if a player
delays the game (while the game is being played, not during
end-game scoring) for more than 10 seconds by trying to
calculate the final score, they lose 2 popularity.
GAME END AND SCORING
DESIGNER'S NOTE: Scythe incentivizes players to end the game
if possible by making stars worth coins and denying
additional turns to opponents. This may result in some
opponents having one fewer overall turns than the player
who placed their final star.
END-GAME SCORING
Accumulate your final fortunecoins you had before
the game end was triggered plus end-game coinsto
determine the winner. You should have a mound of coins
in front of you before announcing the total to the other
players.
To determine how many coins you earn for each of the three
scoring categories, look at your level on the Popularity
Track and pick up coins for that category (do this on your
ownthere is no need for a "banker").

SAMPLE SCORING ROUND:
The first time you play Scythe, we recommend that you run
a sample scoring round during the game so players have a
feel for the actual end-game scoring in advance. After any
player places their first star, pause the game to let players
calculate their current score. This is just for the sake of
examplethis scoring does not actually happen until the
end of the game.

EDGE CASES:
If the 6th star comes from taking a bottom-row action, gain
the primary benefit, the coins, and the Recruit Ongoing
Benefit before placing the star.
If you have units (character, mechs, or workers) remaining
on a territory with an opponent's units (from a Move
action), you must undo that portion of your Move action,
returning the unit(s) to the territory they moved from.
If you place a star for total popularity or total power as
a recruit bonus on an opponent's turn, that placement
happens after the opponent takes the action (e.g., build
a structure) in clockwise order and only if that opponent
didn't place their 6th star by taking that action.

SCORING CATEGORIES:
COINS IN HAND: The coins you accumulated during the game
count for end-game scoring.
EVERY STAR TOKEN PLACED: Gain coins for every star token you
placed during the game.
EVERY TERRITORY CONTROLLED: Gain coins for every territory you
control (including lakes). Home bases aren't territories. You
control each territory where you have a worker, mech, or
character, or where you have a structure (but no enemy units).
FACTORY: At the end of the game, the Factory is counted as
3 territories to the player who controls it.
EVERY 2 RESOURCES CONTROLLED: Gain coins for every 2 resource
tokens you control (e.g., if you control 13 resource tokens
and have 10 popularity, you'll gain a total of 12 coins).
Workers are not resources. You control all resources on
territories where you have a character, worker, mech, or a
structure not occupied by an opponent's unit.
STRUCTURE BONUS TILE: Gain coins based on the number of
structure bonuses you achieved. You gain this bonus even if
you don't control the territories your structures are on.
DECLARING THE WINNER
Announce your coin total, and the player with the most
coins wins! If multiple players have the same total, use the
following as tiebreakers (in order):
1. Number of workers, mechs, and structures
2. Power
3. Popularity
4. Number of resource tokens controlled
5. Number of territories controlled
6. Number of star tokens placed on board
ACHIEVEMENT SHEET: The winner of the game may write
their name up to 2 times on the achievement sheet to
memorialize their victory. This document commemorates
the first time any player wins under a certain condition
(e.g., the first victory with a specific faction).
30
You are represented on the board by your character, who has been sent on a mission to make your faction's claim to the
uncharted lands surrounding the defunct Factory. Each character unit is comprised of a person and their animal companion.
While each of the characters appears to be functionally the same as the others, their unique abilities are manifested in
their respective faction and mech abilities. A full backstory for each character can be found on the Stonemaier Games
website, but here is a short description of each one:
ANNA & WOJTEK (POLANIA REPUBLIC): An expert marksman and a helpful bear, Anna and Wojtek
traveled across the countryside during the Great War, becoming living legends as they
distinguished themselves in battle and showed compassion to even the poorest farmers.
With the Factory shut down and rumors swirling about a growing Rusviet force, Anna
and Wojtek have accepted a mission to ensure the unity and independence of Polania by
securing the eastern border and patrolling the lands surrounding the Factory.
GUNTER VON DUISBURG WITH NACHT & TAG (SAXONY EMPIRE): During the war, Gunter and his wolves
led elite mech squads across the forests and mountains of Saxony and Europa. His name
was both feared and respected, and his jacket grew heavy with medals of honor. Now that
the war is over, the Emperor has asked Gunter to embark on a new adventure to the east,
where he sees a fresh opportunity to expand the Saxony foothold on the unclaimed lands
surrounding the Factory. Tag is shown on several encounter cards, but she is not part of the
character miniature.
ZEHRA & KAR (CRIMEAN KHANATE): The firstborn daughter of the Khan of the Crimean Tartars,
Zehra is able to see through her eagle's eyes, heightening her already formidable skill with
the bow. Though her father was loath to adopt the Factory's advances, he realized that the
world was changing and he could not leave the Khanate exposed to its rivals. Reluctantly, he
has tasked his daughter with an expedition to the north for the purpose of acquiring more
modern technology and ensuring lasting peace for their people.
OLGA ROMANOVA & CHANGA (RUSVIET UNION): When Olga's first love, Viktor, went missing during
the Great War, she vowed to find him again. She joined the Rusviet military intelligence
service with Changa, her Siberian tiger, at her side. With her intelligence and ambition,
she has risen quickly through the ranks, and has used her newly-earned authority to
launch a full-blown invasion into the western landsa desperate attempt to find her
beloved Viktor, with the full strength of the Rusviet military at her back!
BJORN & MOX (NORDIC KINGDOM): Bjorn, the descendant of a renowned Viking family, was saved
from perishing in a blizzard by a kindly muskox. After surviving the ordeal, Bjorn took
the creature as his mount and named him Mox. Together they embarked on a series of
adventures across the land, serving as ambassadors to other tribes, executing military
operations, and seeking out new oil reserves. The King has now sent them southward to
add new villages and farms to the kingdom, either by diplomacy or by force, as well as to
explore the Factory with the hope of gaining a technological advantage for future wars.

CHARACTERS:

RESOURCES: All unitscharacters, mechs, & workers can carry
around resources (any number).
TURNS AND PLAYER MATS: On your turn, you must choose a different
section of your Player Mat than you did the previous turn.
Take either the top-row action, the bottom-row action, or
both (starting with the top action). First pay the full cost of the
action (all icons on exposed red boxes), then gain the benefit
(exposed green boxes). If you select a bottom-row action,
the player to your left may start to take their turn while you
decide exactly which upgrade, mech, structure, or recruit you
will gain. Remember to take the coins from the bottom-row
actions!
MOVE ACTION: You must move different units (not the same unit
multiple times). You may choose only to use part of the
Move action if you only want to move one unit. A mech can
transport workers as part of its movement, then one of those
workers could also move.
PRODUCE ACTION: Produce on 2 different territories. Each worker
on those territories may produce 1 resource token. So if you
have 3 workers on a forest and 2 workers on a farm, a Produce
action generates 3 wood on the forest and 2 food on the farm.
WORKERS: Workers are not resources, but they are produced on
villages just like resources are produced on other terrains.
Just as with any Produce action, first pay the full cost on all
exposed red boxes on the Produce action, then Produce the
worker(s) by taking the meeple from your Player Mat (left
to right). You may choose not to produce a worker, as it can
increase the cost of future Produce actions. Once produced,
workers may never return to your Player Mat.
TRADE: When taking the Trade action, choose any 2 resource
tokens (either the same or different types) and place them on
a territory you control that contains a worker.
BOLSTER: Gain power on the Power Track or draw combat card(s).
If the combat card deck runs out, shuffle the discard pile to
form a new deck.
BOTTOM-ROW ACTIONS: You may continue to pay to take a bottom-row
action for the coin(s) even after you've achieved a star for the
action. This will continue to trigger Recruit Ongoing Bonuses.
UPGRADE: Pick up a technology cube from any green box on your
Player Mat and place it on any red bracketed box on your
Player Mat.
MECHS: Only mechs may carry around workers (any number of
workers)not characters. Mech abilities apply to all mechs
and your character. Each faction has a slightly different
Riverwalk mech ability. If a mech has the Speed ability, it may
pick up and drop off workers/resources mid-movement.
RIVERWALK: Each faction has a slightly different version of the
Riverwalk ability, allowing them to move across rivers onto
two specific terrain types.
STRUCTURES: Only a single structure may be present on each
territory. Structures can't be built on lakes.
RECRUITS: Gain a One-Time Recruit Bonus when taking the
Enlist action. From then on, gain a Recruit Ongoing Bonus
whenever you or the player to your left or right take the
bottom-row action corresponding to that bonus.
COMBAT: Only characters and mechs participate in combat
(moving a character or mech onto a territory containing
an opponent's worker is not combat). Ties are won by the
attacker. If the loser of combat revealed any power during the
combat (either on the Power Dial or via combat cards), they
gain a combat card. Both the winner and loser must pay the
power they selected on the Power Dial.
RETREATING WORKERS (FORCED): You only lose popularity for forcing an
opponent's worker to retreat on your turn. That is, if you
are attacked by a mech with workers on it and you win the
combat, you do not lose 1 popularity for forcing each of those
workers to retreat. On your turn, you may force opponent
workers to retreat even if you don't have enough popularity.
ENCOUNTERS: Only characters may have encounters. To choose
an option on the encounter card, you must be able to pay the
cost (if any). All resources, units, or structures gained from
an encounter card go on the territory where the encounter
occurred. Benefits gained from encounters do not trigger
Recruit Ongoing Bonuses.
FACTORY: Only characters may claim Factory cards (1 per player).
Actions taken on Factory cards do not trigger Recruit Ongoing
Bonuses or Structure Bonuses.
OBJECTIVES: You may reveal a completed objective on your turn.
Discard the other objective card (unless you're playing
Saxony).
STAR PLACEMENT: Once a player places a star on the Triumph Track,
it cannot be removed. Having a star on a goal does not prevent
other players from placing their stars on the same goal. If
a player places their 6th star, the game immediately ends.
Nothing else happens other than end-game scoring.
END-GAME SCORING: At the end of the game, remember to include
coins you earned during the game as part of your final coin
total. When scoring for territorial control, you control a
territory and all resources on it if you have a unit there or if
you have a structure there (unless an opponent has units on
that structure's territory). Make sure to only score for every
two resource tokens you control, not every resource token.
HIGHLIGHTED RULES
 2015 Stonemaier LLC. Scythe is a trademark of Stonemaier LLC. All Rights Reserved.
WANT TO WATCH A HOW-TO-PLAY VIDEO?
Go to stonemaiergames.com/games/scythe/videos/
WANT THE RULES IN ANOTHER LANGUAGE?
Download rules and guides in dozens of languages at
stonemaiergames.com/games/scythe/rules-and-print-play/
HAVE A QUESTION WHILE PLAYING?
Tweet it to @stonemaiergames with the hashtag #scythe
NEED A REPLACEMENT PART?
Request it at stonemaiergames.com/replacement-parts
WANT TO STAY IN TOUCH?
Subscribe to monthly updates at stonemaiergames.com/e-newsletter
WANT A BIGGER BOARD?
Purchase the board extension to create a 50% bigger board at
stonemaier-games.myshopify.com
INTERESTED IN PROMO AND SPECIALTY ITEMS?
All promo items that came in the Kickstarter versions of Scythe are bundled into the items
in the box (i.e., the 6-card Factory promo pack is wrapped up with the other 12 Factory cards).
If you have the retail version of Scythe, you can buy promo and specialty items online
(stonemaier-games.myshopify.com/collections/all) and potentially at conventions or on the
BoardGameGeek.com store.



GAME NAME:
SETTLERS OF CATAN

These 4-page rules (pages 2-5) contain all the important
information that you need to play!
If you need more information during the game, you can look
up keywords (marked?) in the "Almanac," which follows
these rules.

GAME COMPONENTS:
- 19 terrain hexes (tiles)
- 6 sea frame pieces
- 9 harbor piece
- 18 circular number tokens (chits)
-  95 Resource Cards (bearing the symbols for the ore, grain, lumber, wool, and brick resources)
- 25 Development Cards (14 Knight/Soldier Cards,
- 6 Progress Cards, 5 Victory Point Cards)
- 4 "Building Costs" Cards
- 2 Special Cards: "Longest Road" & "Largest Army"
- 16 cities (4 of each color shaped like churches)
- 20 settlements (5 of each color shaped like houses)
- 60 roads (15 of each color shaped like bars)
- 2 dice (1 yellow, 1 red)
- 1 robber
- 1 Game Rules & Almanac booklet

CONSTRUCTING THE ISLAND:
The frame pieces hold the board together and prevent the
pieces from moving after the board is in place. Before building
the island, assemble the frame by matching the numbers at the
ends of the frame pieces together (i.e., 1-1, 2-2, etc.).
You can then construct the island of Catan using the
19 terrain hexes as shown on page 3.

STARTING SET-UP FOR BEGINNERS:
You play the game The Settlers of Catan on a variable game
board. For your first game, however, we suggest that you use
the "Starting Set-up for Beginners?." (See Illus. A on page 3.)
This set-up is well-balanced for all players.
Before your first game you must remove the die-cut
components from the cardboard holders. Carefully punch
out and separate the pieces.
Lay out the map as specified in Illustration A (or on
the back of this booklet).
First, assemble the frame as shown.
Second, create Catan by placing the 19 terrain
hexes on the tableagain as shown.
Third, place the circular number tokens
on top of the designated terrain hexes.
Finally, place your settlements
and roads.

Dear Settlers,
Before you invite your fellow gamers over, we suggest that you read over these "Game Rules." Peruse the short Game
Overview on page 16 (the back cover) and study the game board illustration. Then read the Game Rules in peace.
This will not take long. The actual rules (red pages) are quite short.
You do not need to read the Almanac at the back of this book (gold pages) quite yet. Use the Almanac for reference
when questions come up during play.
Now you are ready for your first adventure on Catan. Have fun settling this new land together!
 Klaus Teuber
You can find further information on the Internet at:
www.catan.com www.mayfairgames.com www.universityofcatan.com www.klausteuber.com
Learn how
to play the quick
and easy way! Visit
www.profeasy.com.
 Prof. Easy

STARTING SET-UP FOR EXPERIENCED PLAYERS:
It is more fun to play with a variable game boardwith the
game board laid out randomly. The board changes each game.
If you would like to use the variable set-up, you can find the
guidelines in the Almanac under Set-up, Variable?. Also look
for useful tips under Set-up Phase? and Tactics?.

SETTING UP THE GAME:
Select a color and take your 5 settlements, 4 cities and
15 roads (no more and no less!). Place your 2 roads and
your 2 settlements on the game board. Place your remaining
settlements, roads, and cities down in front of you.
Note: Remove the red pieces from the game if you are playing a
3-player game.
Take your color's Building Costs Card. (See Illustration B.)
Place the Special Cards "Longest Road" and "Largest Army"
beside the game board along with the 2 dice.
Sort the Resource Cards into 5 stacks and put them face up
next to the game board. Shuffle the Development Cards and
place them face down
by the board.
You receive
resources for each
terrain hex around
your starting
settlement marked
with a white star ?
(see Illustration A).
Take the appropriate
Resource Cards from
their stacks.
Example: See Illustration A. Blue receives 1 brick card, 1 wool card,
and 1 ore card for his leftmost settlement (i.e., his settlement marked
with a star).
Each player keeps his Resource Cards hidden in his hand.
Important: Settlements and cities
may only be placed at the corners
of the terrain hexesnever along
the edges (see Illustration C).
Roads may only be placed at the
edges of the terrain hexes1 road
per edge (see Illustration D). The
Distance Rule means many intersections along roads will remain
unoccupied.

TURN OVERVIEW:
Unless you're using the Starting
Set-Up for Experienced Players,
the oldest player goes first. On
your turn, you can do the following in the order listed:
 You must roll for resource
production? (the result applies to all players).
 You may trade? resources with other players or using
maritime trade.
 You may build? roads?, settlements? or cities? and/or
buy Development Cards?. You may also play one
Development Card? at any time during your turn.
After you're done, pass the dice to the player to your left,
who then continues the game with step 1.
Tip: For advanced players, we recommend combining the second and
third steps. You can find more details in the Almanac under
"Combined Trade/Build Phase."

THE TURN IN DETAIL:
1. Resource Production
You begin your turn by rolling both dice.
The sum of the dice determines which
terrain hexes produce resources.
Each player who has a settlement on an intersection? that
borders a terrain hex marked with the number rolled receives
1 Resource Card of the hex's type. For an example see
resource production?. If you have 2 or 3 settlements
bordering that hex, you receive 1 Resource Card for each
settlement. You receive 2 Resource Cards for each city you
own that borders that hex. If there is not enough of a given
resource in the supply to fulfill everyone's production, then
no one receives any of that resource during that turn.
2. Trade?
Afterwards you may trade freely (using either or both types
of trades below) to gain needed Resource Cards:
a) Domestic Trade?
On your turn, you can trade Resource Cards with any of the
other players. You can announce which resources you need
and what you are willing to trade for them. The other players
can also make their own proposals and counter offers.
Important: Players may only trade with the player whose turn it is.
The other players may not trade among themselves.
b) Maritime Trade?
You can also trade without the other players!
During your turn, you can always trade at 4:1 by putting
4 identical Resource Cards back in their stack and taking any
1 Resource Card of your choice for it.
If you have a settlement or city on a harbor?, you can trade
with the bank more favorably: at either a 3:1 ratio or in special
harbors (trading the resource type shown) at 2:1.
Important: The 4:1 trade is always possible, even if you do not have
a settlement on a harbor.
3. Build?
Now you can build. Through building, you can increase your
victory points?, expand your road network, improve your
resource production, and/or buy useful Development Cards.
To build, you must pay specific combinations of Resource
Cards (see the Building Costs Card). Take the appropriate
number of roads, settlements, and/or cities from your supply
and place them on the game board. Keep Development Cards
hidden in your hand.
You cannot build more pieces than what is available in your
poola maximum of 5 settlements, 4 cities, and 15 roads.
a) Road? requires: Brick & Lumber
A new road must always connect to
1 of your existing roads, settlements,
or cities.
Only 1 road can be built on any
given path?.
The first player to build a continuous
road (not counting forks) of at least 5 road segments, receives
the Special Card "Longest Road"?. If another player succeeds
in building a longer road than the one created by the current
owner of the "Longest Road" card, he immediately takes the
Special Card (and its 2 victory points). In this case, there is a
4 victory point swing!
b) Settlement? requires: Brick, Lumber, Wool, & Grain
Take special note of the "Distance
Rule"?: you may only build a settlement at an intersection if all 3 of the
adjacent intersections are vacant
(i.e., none are occupied by any
settlements or citieseven yours).
Each of your settlements must
connect to at least 1 of your own roads.
Regardless of whose turn it is (i.e., during any production
phase), when a terrain hex produces resources, you receive 1
Resource Card for each settlement you have adjacent to that
terrain hex.
Each settlement is worth 1 victory point.
c) City? requires: 3 Ore & 2 Grain
You may only establish a city by
upgrading one of your settlements.
When you upgrade a settlement to a
city, put the settlement (house) piece
back in your supply and replace it
with a city piece (church).
Cities produce twice as many
resources as settlements. You acquire 2 Resource Cards for an
adjacent terrain hex that produces
resources.
Each city is worth 2 victory
points.
d) Buying Development Card?
requires: Ore, Wool, & Grain
When you buy a Development
Card, draw the top card from the deck. There are 3 different
kinds of these cards: Knight?; Progress?; and Victory
Point?. Each has a different effect (see 4.b. below).
Development Cards never go back into the supply, and you
cannot buy Development Cards if the supply is empty.
Keep your Development Cards hidden (in your hand) until
you use them, so your opponents can't anticipate your play.
4. Special Cases
a) Rolling a "7"? and Activating the Robber
If you roll a "7," no one receives any resources.
Instead, every player who has more than 7 Resource Cards
must select half (rounded down) of his Resource Cards and
return them to the bank.
Then you must move the robber?. Proceed as follows:
(1) You must move the robber? immediately to the number
token of any other terrain hex or to the desert? hex.
(2) Then you steal 1 (random) Resource Card from an
opponent who has a settlement or city adjacent to the
target terrain hex. The player who is robbed holds his
Resource Card hand face down. You then take 1 at random. If the target hex is adjacent to 2 or more players' settlements or cities, you choose which one you want to rob.
Important: If the production number for the hex containing the
robber is rolled, the owners of adjacent settlements and cities do not
receive resources. The robber prevents it.
b) Playing Development Cards?
At any time during your turn, you may
play 1 Development Card (on the table).
That card, however, may not be a card
you bought during the same turn!
Knight (aka "Soldier") Cards
(Red Frame)?
If you play a Knight Card, you must immediately move the
robber. See "Rolling a 7' and Activating the Robber" above
and follow steps 1 and 2.
Once played, Knight Cards remain face up in front of you.
The first player to have 3 Knight Cards in front of himself
receives the Special Card "Largest Army," which is worth
2 victory points. If another player has
more Knight Cards in front of him than
the current holder of the Largest Army
card, he immediately takes the Special
Card and its 2 victory points.
Progress Cards (Green Frame)?
If you play a Progress Card, follow its
instructions. Then the card is removed
from the game (i.e., tossed in the box).
Victory Point Cards (Yellow Frame)?
You must keep Victory Point Cards hidden. You may only
reveal them during your turn and when you are sure that you
have 10 victory pointsthat is, to win the game. Of course,
you can reveal them after the end of the game when someone
else wins. You may play any number of Victory Point Cards
during your turn, even during the turn you purchase them.
ENDING THE GAME
If you have 10 or more victory points during your turn
the game ends and you are the winner! If you reach 10 points
when it is not your turn, the game continues until any player
(including you) has 10 points on his turn.
This "Catan Almanac" contains detailed, alphabetical entries
and examples for The Settlers of Catan. These are not the
"Game Rules"! You do not have to read this material prior to
your first game. Instead, use the Game Rules. Then read this to
enjoy the complete experience.
This almanac includes advanced rules and clarifications. You
can also refer to it if any questions arise during a game.

BUILD (BUILDING):
You may build on your turn after you have rolled for
resource production and finished trading. To build, you must
turn in the specified combinations of Resource Cards (see the
Building Costs Cards?). Return the Resource Cards to the
supply stacks. You can build as many items and buy as many
cards as you desireas long as you have enough resources to
"pay" for them and they are still available in the supply. (See
Settlements?, Cities?, Roads?, and Development Cards?.)
Each player has a supply of 15 roads, 5 settlements, and 4
cities. If you build a city, return the settlement to your supply.
Roads and cities, however, remain on the board until the end
of the game once they are built.
Your turn is over after "building," and the player to your left
continues the game.
New rule variant: see Combined Trade/Build Phase?.
BUILDING COSTS CARDS
The Building Costs Cards show what can be built and which
resources are required. When you pay building costs, you must
return the necessary resources to their supply stacks. You can
build settlements? and roads?, upgrade settlements to
cities?, and buy Development Cards?.

CITIES:
You cannot build a city. You can only upgrade an existing
settlement to a city. You pay the required resources, return the
settlement to your supply, and replace the settlement with a
city on the same intersection?. Each city is worth 2 victory
points. You receive double resource production (2 Resource
Cards) from the adjacent terrain hexes whenever those
numbers are rolled.
When you build a city, the upgraded settlement piece
becomes available again. You can build more settlements later.
Example: See Illustration E. Claudia, the blue player, rolls a resource
production roll of "8." Claudia (blue) receives 3 ore cards: 1 ore for
her settlement and 2 ore for her city. Benny, the red player, receives
2 lumber for his city.
Hint: It is extremely difficult to win the game without upgrading
settlements into cities. Since you only have 5 settlements available,
you can only reach 5 victory points by only building settlements.

COAST:
When a terrain hex borders on the sea (i.e., a frame piece),
it is called a "coast." You can build a road along a coast. You
can build settlements and upgrade settlements to cities on
intersections that border on the sea. Since a site on the coast
borders only 1 or 2 terrain hexes, however, coastal settlements
generate smaller resource yields. Still, coastal sites often lie
on harbors, which allow you to use maritime trade? to trade
resources at more favorable rates.

COMBINED TRADE/BUILD PHASE:
The separation of the trade and build phases was introduced
to make the sequence easier to learn for beginners. We
recommend experienced players ignore this separation.
After rolling for resource production, you can trade and
build in any order. Naturally you can trade, build, trade again
and build again. You can even use a harbor on the same turn
you build a settlement there. This will also speed up the game.

DESERT:
The desert is the only terrain hex that
does not produce resources. The robber?
is native to the desert, and he starts the
game there. A settlement or a city built adjacent to the desert
yields fewer resources than than those built next to one of the
other terrain types.

DEVELOPMENT CARDS:
There are 3 different kinds of
Development Cards: Knights?,
Progress?, and Victory Points?.
When you buy a Development
Card, take the top card of the draw
stack into your hand. Keep your
Development Cards hidden until you
play them. This keeps the other players in the dark.
You cannot trade or give away Development Cards.
You may only play 1 Development Card during your turn
either 1 Knight Card or 1 Progress Card. You can play the
card at any time, even before you roll the dice. You may not,
however, play a card that you bought during the same turn.
Exception: If you buy a card and it is a Victory Point Card?
that brings you to 10 points, you may
immediately reveal this card (and all
other VP cards) and win the game.
You only reveal Victory Point Cards
when the game is overonce you
or an opponent reaches 10+ victory
points and declares victory.

DISTANCE RULE:
You may only build a settlement
on an open intersection? and only if none of the 3 adjacent
intersections contains a settlement or city.
Example: See Illustration F. Coleman, the blue player, wants to build
a settlement. The settlements marked "A" are already in play.
Coleman cannot build on the intersections marked "B." He can only
build at intersection "C."

DOMESTIC TRADE:
On your turn, you may trade resources with the other players
(after rolling for resource production). You and the other
players negotiate the terms of your tradessuch as which
cards will be exchanged. You may trade as many times as you
can, using single or multiple cards, but you may not give away
cards (i.e., "trade" 0 cards for 1 or more cards).
Important: While it is your turn you must be a part of all trades, the
other players may not trade amongst themselves.
Example: It is Pete's turn. He needs one brick to build a road. He
has 2 lumber and 3 ore. Pete asks aloud, "Who will give me 1 brick
for 1 ore?" Beth answers, "If you give me 3 ore, I'll give you a brick."
Cooper interjects, "I'll give you 1 brick if you give me 1 lumber and 1
ore." Pete accepts Cooper's offer and trades a lumber and an ore for
a brick. Note Beth may not trade with Cooper, since it is Pete's turn.

ENDING THE GAME:
If you have or reach10 victory
points on your turn, the game ends
immediately and you win! You can only
win during your turn. If somehow you
find you have 10 victory points during
another player's turn, you must wait
until your next turn to claim victory.
Example: Jhinuk has 2 settlements (2
points), the Longest Road special (2
points), 2 cities (4 points), and 2 Victory
Point Cards (2 points). She reveals her 2
Victory Point Cards, giving her the 10
points needed to win. She surprises her
opponents and claims victory!

GAME PLAY:
Here is a summary of the the game sequence, plus some
more specific entries where you can find details:
(1) Lay out the game board: Set-up, Variable?
(2) Initial set-up: Set-up Phase?
(3) Play.
The starting player begins the game. The other players follow
in clockwise order.
On your turn, you complete these 3 phases in order:
 Roll for Resource Production?
(the roll applies to all players).
 Trade?.
 Build?.
You may play 1 Development Card any time during your turn.
Pass the dice to the player on your left at the end of your
turn. He then takes his turn using the same 3 phases.

HARBORS:
Harbors allow you to trade
resources more favorably. In order to
control a harbor, you must build a settlement on a coastal intersection?
which borders the harbor. See also "Maritime Trade"?.

INTERSECTIONS:
Intersections are the
points where 3 hexes
meet. See Illustration
G. You may only build
settlements on intersections. The influence
(for resource yields)
of settlements and
cities extends into the
3 adjacent terrain
hexes that form the
intersection.

KNIGHT CARDS:
See "Soldier Cards."

LARGEST ARMY:
If you are the first player to play 3
Knight Cards, you receive this
Special Card, which is worth 2
victory points. You place the
"Largest Army" card face up in
front of you. If another player plays more Knight Cards than
you have, he immediately takes the Special Card. The 2 victory
points likewise count for the new owner.

LONGEST ROAD:
If you are the first player to build
a continuous road of at least 5
individual road pieces, you take this
Special Card and place it face up in
front of you. This card is worth 2
victory points.
Note: If your road network branches,
you may only count the single longest
branch for purposes of the longest road.
If you hold the "Longest Road" card and another player
builds a longer road, he immediately acquires your "Longest
Road" card. He also acquires the 2 bonus victory points.
(Since you also lose the 2 victory points, it is a 4 point swing!)
Example: See Illustration H. Emily, the red player, builds a continuous trade route with 7 roads (A-B). The branch roads marked with
arrows are not counted. Emily snags the "Longest Road" Special Card.
You can break an opponent's road by building a settlement
on an open intersection along his road!
Example: In the example on page 8, the blue player Coleman builds
a settlement on intersection "C" (which would be legal). This breaks
Emily's road into 2 parts. Emily must give the Special Card to
Coleman, who now has the Longest Road (and 2 more VPs).
Set the "Longest Road" card aside if after a longest road is
broken several players tie for the new longest road or no
one has a 5+ segment road. The "Longest Road" card comes
into play again when only 1 player has the longest road (of at
least 5 road pieces).

MARITIME TRADE:
On your turn, you can trade resources using maritime trade
during the trade phase even without involving another player.
The most basic (and unfavorable) exchange rate is 4:1. You
may trade 4 identical Resource Cards to the supply in
exchange for the (1) Resource Card of your choice. You do
not need a harbor? (settlement at a harbor location) to trade
at 4:1, so when nobody wants to trade...
Example: Benny returns 4 ore cards to the supply and takes
1 lumber card in exchange. Normally, he should first try a more
favorable trade with the other players (domestic trade).
If you have built a settlement or city at a harbor? location,
you can trade more effectively. There are 2 different kinds of
harbor locations:
Generic Harbor (3:1): Here you may exchange 3 identical
Resource Cards for any one other Resource Card during
your trade phase.
Example: Olivia, the red player, has
built a settlement at a generic harbor.
She can, for instance, exchange
3 lumber cards for 1 wool card.
Special Harbor (2:1): There is
but 1 special harbor for each
type of resource (with the same
symbol). So, it is important to
build on the type of special
harbor you can use fairly
frequently. (Look at your
resource production.)
The exchange rate of 2:1 only
applies to the resource shown
on the harbor location.
A special harbor does not permit you to trade any other
resource type at a more favorable rate (not even 3:1)!
Example: Nick, the orange player, built a settlement at the ore
special harbor. Nick may exchange 2 ore cards for any 1 other
Resource Card. He can also trade 4 ore cards for any 2 other cards. If
he traded 4 wool instead of 4 ore, he would get only 1 card in return.

NUMBER TOKENS (CHITS):
The 18 number tokens are marked with the numerals "2"
through "12." There is only one "2" and one "12." There is
no "7."
The more often a number is rolled, the more often each
associated hex produces resources. Note the dots (pips)
beneath the numbers on the tokens. The larger the number of
dots, the more likely it is that number will be rolled. "6" and
"8" are the most frequently rolled numbers. They each have 5
dots, for there are 5 ways to roll these numbers on the 2 dice.
The small letters on the top of the number markers are
important during the setup phase (see Set-up Phase?).

PATHS:
Paths are defined as the edges
where two hexes meet. Paths run
along the border of two terrain
hexes or between a land hex and the
frame. Only one road? can be built
on any path. Each path leads to an
intersection? where 3 hexes meet.

PROGRESS CARDS:
Progress Cards are a type of Development Card. They have
green frames. There are 2 each of 3 varieties:
Road Building: If you play this card, you may immediately
place 2 free roads on the board (according to normal
building rules).
Year of Plenty: If you play this card you may immediately
take any 2 Resource Cards from the supply stacks. You
may use these cards to build in the same turn.
Monopoly: If you play this card, you must name 1 type of
resource. All the other players must give you all of the
Resource Cards of this type that they have in their hands.

If an opponent does not have a Resource Card of the
specified type, he does not have to give you anything.
You may play only 1 Development Card? during your turn.

RESOURCE CARDS:
There are 5 different types of resources
(see page 3): grain (from fields),
brick (from hills), ore (from mountains),
lumber (from forest), and wool (from
pasture). You receive these cards as income from the resource
production of these hexes. Resource production is determined
by the dice roll at the beginning of each turn. You receive your
income for each terrain hex adjacent to your settlements or
cities every time the production number on the hex is rolled
(exception: see Robber?).

RESOURCE PRODUCTION:
On your turn, you must roll the dice for the turn's resource
production. The number rolled determines which hexes
produce resources. Each number appears twice except for
"2" and "12," which only appear once.
All players who have settlements? or cities? on the hexes
indicated by the roll
receive the yields
(Resource Cards) of
those hexes. Each settlement produces 1
Resource Card; each
city 2 Resource Cards.
Example: Loren, the
blue player, rolls a "4".
Her settlement "A" borders a pasture marked by the number "4", so
she takes a wool card. If settlement "A" had been a city, she would
have received 2 wool cards. Bridget owns the red settlement "B" that
borders on 2 hexes with the number "4": mountains and pasture.
Bridget takes 1 ore card and 1 wool card from the supply stacks.
It is possible that during the game there will not be enough
resources in the bank to supply all of the yields. If there are
not enough Resource Cards to give every player all the production they earn, then no player receives any of that resource that
turn. Production of other types of resources is not affected.

RESOURCE TRADE:
In the second phase of your turn, you may trade with the
other players. The other players may not trade amongst
themselves, only with the
player whose turn it is. There
are 2 different kinds of trade:
 domestic trade? and
 maritime trade?.

ROADS:
The roads connect your
settlements and cities. You
build roads on paths?. You
cannot build new settlements
without also building roads. Roads provide victory points only
if you hold the Longest Road? Special Card. Only 1 road may
be built on each path. You can build roads along the coast.
Example: Liam, the red player, would like to build a road. He may
build (place) his road on any of the paths marked with arrows. Each
of these paths connects to either Liam's road or his settlement.

ROBBER:
The robber begins the game in
the desert?. It is moved only by
rolling a "7"? or playing a
Knight? Card.
If the robber is moved to any
other terrain hex, he prevents that
hex from producing resources.
Players with settlements and/or cities adjacent to the target
terrain hex receive no resources from this hex as long as the
robber is in the hex.
Example: See Illustration I. It is Xander's turn and he rolls a "7." He
must move the robber. The robber was in a fields hex. Xander places
it on the "4" number token of a hills hex. If a "4" is rolled in the
coming turns, the owners of settlements "A" and "B" do not receive a
brick Resource Card. This lasts until the robber is moved again by
another "7" or a Knight Card. Xander may also take 1 Resource Card
at random from 1 of the players who own settlements "A" or "B".

ROLLING A "7" AND ACTIVATING THE ROBBER:
If you roll a "7" for resource production, none of the players
receive resources. Instead:
(1) Each player counts his Resource Cards. Any player with
more than 7 Resource Cards (i.e., 8 or more), must
choose and discard half of them. Return discards to the
supply stacks. If you hold an odd number of cards, round
down (e.g., if you have 9 Resource Cards, you discard 4).
Example: Alex rolls a "7". He has only 6 cards in his hand. Larry has
8 cards and Will has 11. Larry must discard 4 cards and Will 5
(rounding down).
(2) Then you (the player who rolled the "7") must move
the robber? to the number token? of any other terrain
hex (or to the desert? hex). This blocks the resource
production of this hex, until the robber moves to another
number token.
(3) After discarding occurs, you also steal 1 Resource Card at
random from a player who has a settlement or city
adjacent to this new hex. If there are 2 or more players with
buildings there, you may choose from which one to steal.
The robber must be moved. You may not choose to leave the
robber in the same hex.
After moving the robber, your turn continues with the trade
phase.
See also Knights and Soldiers?.

SETTLEMENTS:
A settlement is worth 1 victory point.
Settlements are built on intersections? (where
3 hexes meet). You share in all of the resource
production of each terrain hex adjacent to your settlements.
You must meet 2 conditions when building a settlement:
(1) Your settlement must always connect to 1 or more of
your own roads?.
(2) You must observe the Distance Rule?.
Example: See Illustration J. Olivia, the blue player, wants to build a
new settlement. She may only do so at one of the intersections
marked "B". She cannot build on "A" because of the Distance Rule,
nor on "C" because no blue road leads to this intersection.
Note: If you have built all 5 of your settlements, you must upgrade 1
of your settlements to a city before you can build another settlement.
You will then have the settlement in your supply, so you can build
another settlement.

SET-UP PHASE:
Begin the "set-up
phase" after you
build the game map
(see Illustration K
and Set-up,
Variable?).
Everyone chooses
a color and takes
the corresponding
game pieces:
 5 settlements;
 4 cities;
 15 roads; and
 1 Building Costs Card.
Sort the Resource Cards into 5 stacks and place them face
up beside the board.
Shuffle the Development Cards? and place them face down
beside the Resource Cards.
Place the 2 Special Cards and the dice beside the board.
Place the robber in the desert.
The set-up phase has 2 rounds. Each player builds 1 road
and 1 settlement per round.
Round One
Each player rolls both dice. The player who rolls highest is
the starting player and begins.
Suggested Beginners' Map Set-up
The starting player places a settlement on an open intersection? of his
choice. He places a road adjacent to
this settlement.
The other players then follow clockwise. Everyone places 1 settlement and
1 adjoining road.
Important: When placing all settlements, the Distance Rule?
always applies!
Round Two
Once all players have built their first settlements, the player
who went last in the first round begins round two: he builds
his second settlement and its adjacent road.
Note: After he builds, the other players follow counterclockwise, so
the starting player in Round One places his second settlement last.
The second settlement can be placed on any open intersection, as long as the Distance Rule is observed. It doesn't have
to connect to the first settlement. The second road must attach
to the second settlement (pointing in any of the 3 directions).
Each player receives his starting resources immediately after
building his second settlement; for each terrain hex adjacent
to this second settlement, he takes a corresponding Resource
Card from the supply.
Note: The starting player (the last to place his second settlement)
begins the game: He rolls both dice for resource production. You can
find helpful tips about the set-up phase under "Tactics."

SET-UP, VARIABLE:
Assemble the frame as outlined on pages 2-3.
Note: If you want to vary relative harbor locations slightly, just
shuffle the order of the frame pieces AND do not place the random
harbor pieces as outlined below in point 2.
Turn the terrain hexes face down. Shuffle the terrain hexes.
1. Randomly place the terrain tiles face up inside the frame
arranged as shown in Illustration L.
2. Now take the
9 harbor pieces
(the small 5-
sided pieces with
ships on them)
and randomly
place one on top
of each harbor
on the frame. See
Illustration M.
3. Place the 18 number tokens as shown in Illustration N:
 Sort the number
tokens beside the
board.
 Place 1 token on
each land hex.
Start at a corner
of the island.
Place the number
tokens on the terrain hexes in
alphabetical
order, proceding
counter-clockwise toward the center. Skip the desert.
Important: Alternatively, you can use a fully random set-up. Place 1
token on each land hex. Start at one corner of the island, and place
the number tokens in random order. In such case, the tokens with
the red numbers must not be next to each other. You may have to
swap tokens to ensure that no red numbers are on adjacent hexes.
Note: The desert never gets a number token. It should be skipped.
More set-up instructions can be found in "Set-up Phase."?
SOLDIER (KNIGHT) CARDS
When you play a "Knight" Development Card during
your turn, you must immediately move the robber?.
Place the Knight Card face up in front of you.
You must move the robber away from his current spot and
onto the number token of any other terrain hex.
You then steal 1 Resource Card from a player who has a
settlement or a city adjacent to the robber. If there are 2 or
more such players, you may choose your victim.
The player you elect to rob keeps his cards face down while
you take 1 of his cards at random. If he has no cards, you get
nothing! (However, you can always ask players about the
number of cards they hold.)
If you are the first player to have 3 Knight Cards face up in
front of you, you take the "Largest Army"? Special Card. This
Special Card is worth 2 victory points.
If another player has more Knight Cards than you, he takes
the Special Card, and the 2 victory points that go with it.
Example: See Illustration O. On Al's turn he plays a Knight Card and
moves the robber from the fields hex to the hills hex with the "4." Al
may now steal a random card from player A or B.
STARTING SET-UP FOR BEGINNERS
If you want to use the starting set-up illustrated in Illustration
P (and Game Overview), lay out the board as shown:
 Assemble the frame exactly as shown in Illustration P.
 Place the terrain hexes exactly as shown in Illustration P.
 Place 2 settlements and 2 roads of each color as shown.
If only 3 are playing, remove the red pieces.
 Each player receives the 3 resources from the terrain
hexes adjacent to his settlement marked by the white star.
The oldest player is the starting player. The oldest player
takes the first turn and rolls for resource production.

TACTICS:
Since you play The Settlers of Catan with a variable map, the
tactical considerations of each game are different. There are,
nevertheless, some common points you should consider:
 Brick and lumber are the most important resources at the
beginning of the game. You need both to build roads and
settlements. You should try to place at least 1 of your first
settlements on a good forest or hills hex.
 Do not underestimate the value of harbors. For instance,
a player with settlements or cities on productive fields
should try to build a settlement on the "grain" harbor.
 Leave enough room to expand when placing your first
2 settlements. Look at your opponents' sites and
roads before making a placement. Beware of getting
surrounded! If you plan to build toward a harbor, the
middle of the island may be a tricky place for a starting
settlement, for it can easily be cut off from the coast.
 The more you trade, the better your chances of
victory. Even if it is not your turn, you should offer
trades to the current player!

TRADE:
After you roll for resource production, you may trade
with other players (domestic trade?) or with the bank
(maritime trade?).
If you decide not to trade during your turn, no one
can trade.
You may trade with another player between your
turns, but only if it is his turn and he elects to trade
with you. You cannot trade with the bank during
another player's turn. You may not give away cards.
You may trade as long as you have Resource Cards. Illustration P
Illustration O
You may not trade Development
Cards. You may not trade like
resources (e.g., 2 wool for 1 wool).

VICTORY POINT CARDS:
Victory Point Cards are yellow
frame Development Cards?, so
they can be "bought." These Development Cards represent
important cultural achievements, represented by certain
buildings.
Each Victory Point Card is worth 1 victory point.
You only reveal your Victory Point Cards when you or someone else wins the game! Keep Victory Point Cards hidden until
you have 10 points during your turn and you can declare
victory. (You should also reveal them if someone else wins.)
Hint: Again, keep your Victory Point Cards hidden until the end of
the game. Place them face down in front of you. Of course, if you
have 1 or 2 unused cards face
down in front of you for a
long time, the other players
will assume that they are
Victory Point Cards.

VICTORY POINTS:
The first player to reach
(be at) 10 victory points
on his turn wins the game.
Players acquire victory
points (VPs) for the
following:
1 Settlement = 1 VP
1 City = 2 VPs
Longest Road
Special Card = 2 VPs
Largest Army
Special Card = 2 VPs
Victory Point Card = 1 VP
Since each player begins
with 2 settlements, each
player begins the game
with 2 victory points.
Therefore, you only need
8 more victory points to
win the game!

CREDITS:
Copyright  1995, 1997, 1999, 2005, 2007 Catan GmbH
and Mayfair Games, Inc. Published under license from
Catan GmbH (www.catan.com). Published in cooperation with
Kosmos Verlag (www.kosmos.de). Catan, Catan Adventures,
and The Settlers of Catan and all other product titles and
marks listed herein are trademarks of Catan GmbH.
All rights reserved.
Design: Klaus Teuber (www.klausteuber.com).
Development: TM-Spiele GmbH.
Cover Art: Volkan Baga.
Art for Tiles & Resource Cards: Harald Lieske.
Art for Development Cards,
Special Cards, Borders: Stephen Graham Walsh.
Art Direction & Graphics: Pete Fenlon.
Graphic Design: Pete Fenlon, Matthew Schwabel,
Jason O. Hawkins, Jessica Ney-Grimm.
Production: Pete Fenlon, Coleman Charlton.
Translation: Guido Teuber, William Nielbling.
English Language Development: William Niebling,
Guido Teuber, Coleman Charlton, Robert T. Carty Jr.,
Will Niebling, Alex Yeager, Larry Roznai, Nick Johnson,
and Pete Fenlon.
Special Thanks: Bridget Roznai, Loren Roznai, Schar Niebling,
Peter Bromley, Darwin Bromley, Trella Wilhite, Bill Wordelmann,
Elaine Wordelmann, Lou Rexing, Tom Smith, Keywood Cheeves,
Mike Strack, Aud Ketilsdatter (LSKC/354-2), Richard Thames Rowan,
Benny Teuber, Claudia Teuber, Liam Teuber, Leif Teuber, Gero Zahn,
Luc Mertens, Mike Szul, Emily Johnson, Olivia Johnston, Karl Roelofs,
Arnd Beenen, and the late Scott Anderson.
MAYFAIR GAMES, INC.
www.mayfairgames.com
Log on to www.profeasy.com to learn how to play
or teach your friends. You'll find a simple, interactive
tutorial to help you understand and master the game
of your choice.
Also check out www.catan.com and
www.klausteuber.com for news and links.
15
ALMANAC INDEX
ENTRIES PAGE
Build (Building) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Building Costs Cards. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Cities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Coast. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Combined Trade/Build Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Desert. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Development Cards. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Distance Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Domestic Trade. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Ending the Game . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Game Play. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Harbors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Intersections. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Knight Cards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Largest Army. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Longest Road . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Maritime Trade. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Number Tokens (Chits) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Paths. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Progress Cards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Resource Cards. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Resource Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Resource Trade. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Roads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Robber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Rolling a "7" and Activating the Robber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Settlements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Set-up Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Set-up, Variable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Soldier (Knight) Cards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Starting Set-up for Beginners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Tactics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Trade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Victory Point Cards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Victory Points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
THE WORLD OF CATAN
Now that you've tried The Settlers of Catan, check out these
other fine titles from the world of Catan. All are designed by
Klaus Teuber, the creator of Catan. (Find out more about these
and other Catan products at www.mayfairgames.com.)
CORE CATAN GAMES
 The Settlers of Catan
 The Settlers of Catan Travel Edition
 Catan Card Game
 The Starfarers of Catan
 Starship Catan
 The Kids of Catan
GAME EXPANSIONS*
 Catan: Seafarers
 Catan: Cities & Knights
 Catan Card Game Expansion Set
5-6 PLAYER EXTENSIONS*
 The Settlers of Catan 5-6 Player Extension
 Catan: Seafarers 5-6 Player Extension
 Catan: Cities & Knights 5-6 Player Extension
 The Starfarers of Catan 5-6 Player Extension
CATAN HISTORIES
 The Settlers of the Stone Age
 Struggle for Rome
CATAN ADVENTURES
 Candamir: The First Settlers
 Elasund: The First City
*ALL EXPANSIONS REQUIRE CORE GAME.

Explore the world of
Catan online with
"PlayCatan" at
Explore the world of Catan on Xbox Live Arcade! www.playcatan.com
Go to www.catanlive.com.
Also check out www.catanonline.com to see how you
can play online with friends or other enthusiasts using
your PC. Download the computer game for challenging,
portable solo play.



GAME NAME:
ONE NIGHT ULTIMATE WEREWOLF

In One Night Ultimate Werewolf, each player takes on the role of a Villager, a Werewolf,
or a special character. It's your job to figure out who the Werewolves are and to kill
at least one of them in order to win...unless you've become a Werewolf yourself!

CONTENTS:
- 3 Villagers
- 2 Werewolves
- 1 Seer
- 1 Robber
- 1 Troublemaker
- 1 Tanner
- 1 Drunk
- 1 Hunter
- 2 Masons
- 1 Insomniac
- 1 Minion

BASIC SETUP:
Setup differs based on the number of players (3-10).
For your first game, it's recommended that you play
a 3-5 player game to get a quick sense of gameplay
(If you have more, don't worry. The game is very
quick and everyone else will enjoy watching).
Include the following cards:
3 players 4 Players 5 Players
2 Werewolves
1 Seer 1 Robber
1 Troublemaker
1 Villager
+1 Villager +2 Villagers
There should always be three more cards than
the number of players. Shuffle the selected cards
face down and deal one to each player. Put the
remaining three cards and tokens that match all
the cards being used in the middle of the table.
Each player should secretly view their card, and
place it face down near the three cards in the
center of the table. All players should be able to
reach all cards easily, as shown in the example for
5 players below:

NIGHT:
There are several roles that are called on at night to
do a night action. However, players with a Villager,
Tanner, or Hunter card never wake up at night.
In addition to having a role card, one player is des- ignated the Announcer and announces each of the
roles in order and silently counts to ten after each
role is woken up to allow the players with that role
to perform their action at night. Use this script
with the previously suggested cards:
Announcer: "Everyone, close your eyes."
All players close their eyes (including the
Announcer).
"Werewolves, wake up and look for other
werewolves."
The werewolves open their eyes and look for
anyone else whose eyes are open (there might
not be any others).
"Werewolves, close your eyes. Seer, wake up.
You may look at another player's card or two
of the center cards."
The player with the Seer card opens her eyes
and may quietly look at one other player's
card or any two of the cards in the center.
"Seer, close your eyes. Robber, wake up.
You may exchange your card with another
player's card, and then view your new card."
The player with the Robber card opens his eyes
and may quietly exchange his card for another
player's card, which he looks at.
"Robber, close your eyes. Troublemaker,
wake up. You may exchange cards between
two other players."
The player with the Troublemaker card opens her
eyes and may quietly exchange the cards of two
other players without looking at those cards.
"Troublemaker, close your eyes."
The Announcer, keeping his eyes closed, moves
the cards around slightly (this ensures no
one can claim a card was moved/inspected
because it is no longer in its original position).
" Everyone, Wake up!"
All players open their eyes and look around
suspiciously.
At night, players who are not active (whose eyes
are closed) may not move, point, or do anything
to communicate with the active player(s).

DAY:
After the night phase, players discuss amongst
themselves who they believe the Werewolves are.
All players may say anything, but may never show
their card to anyone. Werewolves might want to
claim to be a different role so that they don't die.
Because certain roles change other players' cards,
some players will believe they are one role, when
they are actually a different one. After the night
phase, your role is the card that is currently in
front of you, which may be different than your
original role. No one may look at any cards after
the night phase.
After a few minutes of discussion, players vote.
"Everyone, three, two, one, VOTE!"
Each player points to another player.
The player with the most votes dies and reveals
his card. In case of a tie, all players tied with the
most votes die and reveal their cards.
If no player receives more than one vote, no one
dies. One way the players might achieve this is if
everyone votes in the same direction around the
table, with each player receiving one vote (decide
this as a group before you vote).
GAME END
After just one night and one day...
The village team wins:
1) If at least one Werewolf dies. Even if one
or more players who are not Werewolves die
in addition to a Werewolf dying, everyone
on the village team wins.
2) If no one is a Werewolf and no one dies.
It is possible for no one to be a Werewolf if
all Werewolf cards are in the center.
The werewolf team only wins if at least one play- er is a Werewolf and no Werewolves are killed.
If you are playing with the Tanner, there are special rules regarding who wins; see the Tanner's
role description for details.
ANNOUNCER TIPS
As the Announcer, place any tokens with num- bers on them near you, and open your eyes in
between roles if you need to check the night
wake order. Otherwise keep your eyes closed during the night. You may want to tap on the table
during the night to cover up any sounds made
by the different players when they are looking at
and moving cards. If you call your own role, don't
speak while performing your action.
When introducing players to the game for the
first time, or introducing new roles, be sure to
pause during the "action" section of each role you
call to give players enough time to decide what to
do and to complete their action.

GET THE FREE APP:
Instead of having an Announcer, you can simply
use the free app for mobile devices available at
www.beziergames.com. This app calls out the
roles you're using in order, provides some back- ground noise, and also has a timer for the day
phase. You can even set it to move quickly once the
players are comfortable with all the roles.
The app works on both Android and iOS devices
and is completely free!

OTHER TIPS:
The length of time it takes for discussion during
the day phase is up to the players. With larger
groups, you'll need a bit more time than with
smaller groups. After a few plays with a few larger
groups, consider using a timer; when the timer
goes off, everyone must vote. This adds a sense of
urgency to the discussions, and will result in less
non-relevant conversations during the day.
Playing with higher player numbers (7+) can
make it difficult for everyone to reach the middle
of the table. Standing at the table during the
Night phase can make reaching easier, and using
a smaller table can also help. If you have to use a
long "banquet" table, try to position the players
on the long sides of it, and not the ends.

TOURNAMENT PLAY:
Set up a mini tournament by providing the winners of each game with a poker chip or other
small item. Once any player has obtained a specified number of chips, such as five, the player with
the most chips wins. Continue playing if there is a
tie until one player has the most chips.
For larger tournaments with multiple games, do
a double-elimination style tournament, where
players play until they have lost twice.

USING OTHER ROLES:
You may use additional roles in your games be- yond the basic setup. Just take out a card and
replace it with a different one. You may use
virtually any combination of cards, though you
probably don't want to introduce more than 1 or
2 new roles at a time, so players can easily under- stand them.
Regardless of which roles are present, you must
always have 3 more cards than players.
Before each round, place a token that corre- sponds to each of the cards near the Announcer.
This way everyone will know what roles are in
the game, and the Announcer will know in what
order to call them.
Be creative in your role selection: Try having a
single Werewolf, or shuffling all of the cards and
dealing them out to players entirely randomly!
You can even create a village with no Villager
cards...that way everyone has a special role.

ROLES THAT WAKE UP AT NIGHT:
These roles wake up at night in the following
order (see the chart on the back page for a nice
compressed list that's easy to refer to). Within
each of the role descriptions is a sample script
which the Announcer may use:

DOPPELGNGER:
The Doppelgnger is a fairly
complicated card, because she
takes on the role and team of
whatever card she views. If you
haven't played with most of the
other roles yet, skip this section
for now...it will make a lot more sense then.
The Doppelgnger wakes up before the other
roles.
At night, the Doppelgnger looks at (but does not
switch) one other player's card and does the fol- lowing based on what she sees:
Villager, Tanner, Hunter: She is now that role
and does nothing else at night.
Werewolf or Mason: She wakes up with the
other Werewolves or Masons when they are
called. She is on the werewolf team if she views a
Werewolf, and is on the village team if she views
a Mason.
Seer, Robber, Troublemaker, Drunk: She im- mmediately does that role's action (she does not
wake up again with the original role when it is
called).
Minion: At the end of the Doppelgnger phase,
the Announcer tells the Doppelgnger to close
her eyes unless she is now the Minion, and that
werewolves should put their thumbs up. She is on
the werewolf team.
Insomniac: After the Insomniac closes her eyes,
the Doppelgnger-Insomniac is woken up to
check her card to see if she is still the Doppelgn- ger.
If a player receives the Doppelgnger card during
the night, she is the role the Doppelgnger origi- nally viewed. The Doppelgnger's script at night
is a little different than most, as she has to be told
to look for werewolves if she is the Minion, and is
woken up later at night if the Insomniac is pres- ent. Use the following script if there is no Minion
in the game:
"Doppelganger, wake up and look at
another player's card. You are now that
role. If your new role has a night action,
do it now."
The Doppelgnger opens her eyes and looks
at one other player's card. If the viewed card is
the Seer, Robber, Troublemaker, or Drunk, she
does that action right now. If the viwed card
is a Werewolf or Mason, she wakes up when
those roles are called. If the viewed card is a
Villager, Tanner or Hunter, she does nothing.
"Doppelgnger, close your eyes."
If there is a Minion in the game, use this script:
"Doppelgnger, wake up and look at
another player's card. You are now that
role. If your new role has a night action,
do it now."
The Doppelgnger opens her eyes and looks
at one other player's card. If the viewed card is
the Seer, Robber, Troublemaker or Drunk, she
does that action right now. If the viewed card
is a werewolf or Mason, she wakes up when
those roles are called. If the viewed card is a
Villager, Tanner or Hunter, she does nothing.
"If you are now a Minion, keep your eyes
open. Otherwise, close them. Werewolves,
stick out your thumb so the DoppelgngerMinion can see who you are."
If the Doppelgnger is a Minion, she keeps
her eyes open; otherwise, she closes them.
The werewolves stick out a thumb for the
Doppelgnger-Minion to see.
"Werewolves, put your thumbs away. Dop- pelgnger, close your eyes."
If there is an Insomniac in the game, after the In- somniac has been called, use the following script:
"Doppelgnger, if you viewed the Insom- niac card, wake up and look at your card."
The Doppelgnger opens her eyes and looks
at her card to see if has changed during the
night.
"Doppelgnger, close your eyes."

WEREWOLF:
At night, all Werewolves open
their eyes and look for other
werewolves. If no one else opens
their eyes, the other Werewolves
are in the center. Werewolves are
on the werewolf team.
"Werewolves, wake up and look for other
Werewolves."
The Werewolves open their eyes and look
for anyone else whose eyes are open (there
might not be any others).
"Werewolves, close your eyes."
Lone Wolf Option: If there is only one Werewolf,
the Werewolf may view one center card. This is
extremely beneficial to a Werewolf who doesn't
have a partner, and provides him with a useful
tool for deceiving the rest of the players.

MINION:
Immediately following the Werewolf phase at night, the Minion
wakes up and sees who the Werewolves are. During this phase, all
Werewolves put their thumbs up
so the Minion can see who they
are. The Werewolves don't know who the Minion
is. If the Minion dies and no Werewolves die, the
Werewolves (and the Minion) win. If no players
are Werewolves, the Minion wins as long as one
other player (not the Minion) dies. This role can
be a very powerful ally for the werewolf team.
This Minion is on the werewolf team.
"Minion, wake up. Werewolves, stick out
your thumb so the Minion can see who
you are."
The Minion opens his eyes. The Werewolves
stick out a thumb for the Minion to see. The
Minions look around to see which players are
Werewolves.
"Werewolves, put your thumbs away.
Minion, close your eyes."

MASON:
When using the Masons always
put both Masons in the game.
The Mason wakes up at night and
looks for the other Mason. If the
Mason doesn't see another Mason,
it means the other Mason card is in
the center. Masons are on the village team.
"Masons, wake up and look for other
Masons."
The Masons open their eyes and look for
anyone else whose eyes are open (there
might not be any others).
"Masons, close your eyes."

SEER:
At night, the Seer may look ei- ther at one other player's card
or at two of the center cards, but
does not move them. The Seer is
on the village team.
"Seer, wake up. You may look at another
player's card or two of the center cards."
The player with the Seer card opens her eyes
and may quietly look at one other player's
card or any two of the cards in the center.
"Seer, close your eyes."
ROBBER
At night, the Robber may choose
to rob a card from another player
and place his Robber card where
the other card was. Then the
Robber looks at his new card. The
player who receives the Robber
card is on the village team. The Robber is on the
team of the card he takes, however, he does not do
the action of his new role at night.
If the Robber chooses not to rob a card from an- other player, he remains the Robber and is on the
village team.
"Robber, wake up. You may exchange your
card with another player's card, and then
view your new card."
The player with the Robber card opens his
eyes and may quietly exchange his card for
another player's card, which he looks at.
"Robber, close your eyes.

TROUBLEMAKER:
At night, the Troublemaker may
switch the cards of two other
players without looking at those
cards. The players who receive
a different card are now the role
(and team) of their new card, even
though they don't know what role that is until
the end of the game. The Troublemaker is on the
village team.
"Troublemaker, wake up. You may ex- change cards between two other players."
The player with the Troublemaker card opens her
eyes and may quietly exchange the cards of two
other players without looking at those cards.
"Troublemaker, close your eyes."

DRUNK:
The Drunk is so drunk that he
doesn't remember his role. When
it comes time to wake up at night,
he must exchange his Drunk card
for any card in the center, but he
does not look at it. The Drunk is now the new role
in front of him (even though he doesn't know
what that new role is) and is on that team.
"Drunk, wake up and exchange your card
with a card from the center."
The player with the Drunk card opens his
eyes and exchanges his card for one of the
three center cards, but does not view his
new card.
"Drunk, close your eyes."

INSOMNIAC:
The Insomniac wakes up and
looks at her card (to see if it has
changed). Only use the Insomni- ac if the Robber and/or the Trou- blemaker are in the game. The
Insomniac is on the village team.
"Insomniac, wake up and look at your card."
The player with the Insomniac card opens
her eyes and looks at her own card to see if it
has changed during the night.
"Insomniac, close your eyes."

NO-WAKE ROLES:
The following roles do not wake up at night:

VILLAGER:
The Villager has no special abili- ties, but he is definitely not a
werewolf. Players may often claim
to be a Villager. The Villager is on
the village team.

TANNER:
The Tanner hates his job so much
that he wants to die. The Tanner
only wins if he dies. If the Tanner
dies and no Werewolves die, the
Werewolves do not win. If the Tan- ner dies and a Werewolf also dies,
the village team wins too. The Tanner is consid- ered a member of the village (but is not on their
team), so if the Tanner dies when all werewolves
are in the center, the village team loses. The Tan- ner is not on the werewolf or the villager team.

HUNTER:
If the Hunter dies, the player he
is pointing at dies as well (regardless of how many votes his target
receives). The Hunter is on the village team.

USING ROLE TOKENS:
One Night Ultimate Werewolf includes role tokens
that match each of the cards. You can use these in
a few different ways:
1. Display what roles are in play during each
game: Put the roles that are being used face
up near the center of the table, so everyone
can see which roles (and how many of each)
are in the current game. The numbers on the
tokens correspond to the night wake order.
2. Randomly select the roles that are in each
game: place the tokens in a bag and draw out
the number of roles you need (the number of
players plus three).
3. During the day phase of the game, players can
use the tokens to help them deduce players'
roles by placing appropriate tokens on top of
cards that they've "verified."

THANKS PLAYTESTERS:
Nicola Ally, Dakota Alspach, Gage Alspach, Toni Alspach, Chris
Beley, Daniel Betat, David Betat, Ric Bretschnieder, Donna
Brooks, Stephen Buonocore, Steve Carlson, Bay Chang, David
Coleson, Stephen Conway, Audrey Cueto, Drake Delmar, Cecil De- vers, Annalyn Diaz, Teddy Diaz, James A. English, Randy Farmer,
Jesse Filipko, Lom Friedman, Mulysa Funk, Shelley Ganschow,
Doug Garrett, Chris George, Vince Guinto, Mike Heller, Jeremy
Higdon, Henry Kagey, Laura Kelly, Bobby Lasher, Chris Lasher,
Maura Lawton, Eddy Lazzarin, Evan Leal, Michelle Lian, Bernie
Litgo, Dean Lizardo, David Mailhot, Mother Malone, Ted Mar- shall, Danny Martin, Jessica McCartney, Sean McCoy, Matthew
Miller, Brian Modreski, Elwyn Moir, Michael Morrison, Nathan
Morse, Richard New, Aaron Newman, Aliza Panitz, Bai Phelm,
Greg Poulos, Tony Sadak, Steve Samson, Andy Scheffler, Jef- frey Shih, Daved Strauss, Debbie Sullivan, Monkia von Tagen,
Everett Tishler, Clifford Tong, Brent Townsley, Candy Weber, Ray
Wisneski, Karen Woodmansee, Clyde Wright, David Zeeman, and
many others.

THE ORIGINAL ONE NIGHT WEREWOLF:
The original game was
released in January 2013, and despite being an
indie game, sold 10,000 copies in six months, be- coming an unprecedented hit. The English version
of the original game debuted in October 2013 at
the Essen Spiel fair. By being playable with 3-7
players, taking only ten minutes with no down- time, it overcame some of the issues with certain
Werewolf games that need a large amount of
players and take a long time to play.
It became the basis for One Night Ulti- mate Werewolf which expanded on the
same idea, with One Night Werewolf
being the lighter, compact version
and One Night Ultimate Werewolf the
deluxe version.
One Night Werewolf can be purchased directly for
$15 at http://www.beziergames.com or anywhere
else Bezier Games products are sold.
One Night Werewolf: http://1nite-jinro.com/
Twitter: https://twitter.com/1nite_jinro
Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/1nite.jinro

ABOUT THE DESIGNERS:
Ted Alspach is the designer of several games
including Ultimate Werewolf and Suburbia. He re- sides in a secluded fortress somewhere in North- ern California with his wife, son, daughter, dog,
and two cats, all of whom claim not to be were- wolves. Ted doesn't believe any of them.
Akihisa Okui is a designer who recently popped
up in the Japanese indie board game scene. His
game One Night Werewolf became the 2013 best
selling board game in Japan.

ABOUT THE ARTIST:
Brazilian artist Gus Batts has illustrated more
than 50 children's books. See more of his fantastic
artwork at www.gusbatts.daportfolio.com.

NIGHT WAKE ORDER:
When playing with different roles, the order that
the roles wake up at night is important. The fol- lowing is a list of ALL the roles that are woken at
night, and the order they should be woken rela- tive to each other (only call the roles that are in
your game):
#1: Doppelgnger
#2: Werewolves
#3: Minion
#4: Masons
#5: Seer
#6: Robber
#7: Troublemaker
#8: Drunk
#9: Insomniac
#9a: Doppelgnger/Insomniac
The Villagers, the Tanner, and the Hunter are
never woken up at night.
www.beziergames.com
Ultimate Werewolf, One Night Ultimate Werewolf, and these rules are Copyright 2014 Ted Alspach and Bezier Games, all rights reserved.
One Night Werewolf is Copyright 2013 Akihisa Okui, all rights reserved.




GAME NAME:
LOVE LETTER

The guard looked Bartolemew
Kaiss up and down for a moment
and then frowned. "I'm sorry,
Master Kaiss, but the princess is
not seeing visitors at this time. She
is, of course, in despair over the
arrest of her mother."
"Of course," the young composer
said, nodding and looking
appropriately sympathetic. "But I
am not just visiting, you see. Her
Highness requested my instruction.
We are to practice her singing."
"The princess already has a vocal
maestro," the gruff woman replied,
raising an eyebrow.
"I'm sure he knows that, Odette,"
said a kind voice echoing down the
hall that connected the residence to
the palace. The two turned to see
Susannah, one of Princess Annette's
handmaids, walking toward them.
"What the good composer means
to say is that Annette requested his
work for their practice." The young
woman smiled at the guard and
gave Bartolemew a conspiratorial
wink.
From his satchel, Bartolemew
produced a sealed tube. "If you will
be so kind as to deliver these sheets
of music, my dear Susannah," he
said with a smile and a genteel nod.
The guard took the tube from him,
but as it changed hands, something
with a little weight shifted inside
the tube. "What's this, then?" the
guard asked, jostling it next to her
ear.
Certainly not a small statue of a bird
the Princess is so fond of, Bartolemew
thought. "The... quill and ink I
used to pen the music, in case she
or the maestro wish to make any
changes. I always deliver some with
a new composition."
Susannah gently took the case
from the suspicious guard. "Oh,
would you stop, Odette? It's just
some music," she chided playfully.
"I'll see to it that milady gets
these," she added with a hand on
Bartolemew's arm. "I'm sure she'll
be eager to see the contents."
object
In the wake of the arrest of Queen
Marianna for high treason, none
was more heartbroken than her
daughter, Princess Annette.
Suitors throughout the CityState of Tempest sought to ease
Annette's sorrow by courting her to
bring some joy into her life.
You are one of these suitors, trying
to get your love letter to the
princess. Unfortunately, she has
locked herself in the palace, so you
must rely on intermediaries to carry
your message.
During the game, you hold one
secret card in your hand. This is
who currently carries your message
of love for the princess.
Make sure that the person closest to
the princess holds your love letter
at the end of the day, so it reaches
her first!

COMPONENTS:
Your game of Love Letter should
include the following. If it does
not, contact customerservice@
alderac.com for assistance.
- 16 game cards
- 4 reference cards
- tokens of affection

GAME CARDS:
The game has 16 cards. Each
different card name represents
someone at the royal residence.
Each card has a value in the upper
left cornerthe higher the number,
the closer that person is to the
princess. At the bottom of each
card, a text box describes the effect
when the card is discarded.
reference cards
These list the various cards in the
game, as well as their effects and
how many copies are in the deck.
They are not used in the game, but
are provided as a memory aid.
tokens of affection
Red tokens are also included. These
are used to track Princess Annette's
ever-growing affection for those
suitors whose letters reach her.

SETUP:
Shuffle the 16 cards to form a
face-down draw deck. Remove the
top card of the deck from the game
without looking at it.
If you are playing a two-player
game, take three more cards from
the top of the deck and place them
to the side, face up. They will not
be used during this round.
Each player draws one card from
the deck. This is the player's hand,
and is kept secret from the others.
Whoever was most recently on a
date goes first (if tied, the younger
player wins the tie).

HOW TO PLAY:
Love Letter is played in a series
of rounds. Each round represents
one day. At the end of each round,
one player's letter reaches Princess
Annette, and she reads it.
When she reads enough letters from
one suitor, she becomes enamored
and grants that suitor permission
to court her. That player wins the
princess's heart and the game.

TAKING A TURN:
On your turn, draw the top card
from the deck and add it to your
hand. Then choose one of the two
cards in your hand and discard it
face up in front of you. Apply any
effect on the card you discarded.
You must apply its effect, even if it
is bad for you.
See page 15 for the effects of each
individual card. Likewise, if you
have any questions about special
cases regarding the card, you'll find
the answer there.
All discarded cards remain in front
of the player who discarded them.
Overlap the cards so that it's clear
in which order they were discarded.
This helps players to figure out
which cards other players might be
holding.
Once you finish applying the card's
effect, the turn passes to the player
on your left.

OUT OF THE ROUND:
If a player is knocked out of the
round, that player discards the card
in his or her hand face up (do not
apply the card's effect) and takes
no more turns until next round.

HONESTY:
A player could cheat when chosen
with the Guard, or fail to discard
the Countess when that player has
the King or Prince in hand. We
suggest that you don't play with
knaves who cheat at fun, light games.

END OF A ROUND:
A round ends if the deck is empty
at the end of a turn. The royal
residence closes for the evening,
the person closest to the princess
delivers the love letter, and Princess
Annette retires to her chambers to
read it.
All players still in the round reveal
their hands. The player with the
highest ranked person wins the
round. In case of a tie, the player
who discarded the highest total
value of cards wins.
A round also ends if all players but
one are out of the round, in which
case the remaining player wins.
The winner receives a token of
affection. Shuffle all 16 cards
together, and play a new round
following all of the setup rules.
The winner of the previous round
goes first, because the princess
speaks kindly of him or her at
breakfast.

WINNING:
A player wins the game after
winning a number of tokens based
on the number of players:
 2 Players 7 tokens
 3 Players 5 tokens
 4 players 4 tokens

THE PEOPLE:
The events of this game take place
between the events of Courtier
and Dominare, two other games
in the Tempest line. Here are brief
profiles of the people in the game.
8: princess annette
Hampered only by the navete of youth,
Princess Annette is elegant, charming,
and beautiful. Obviously, you want the
princess to carry your letter. However,
she is self-conscious about matters of the
heart, and if confronted, will toss your
letter in the fire and deny ever seeing it.
If you discard the Princess no
matter how or why she has tossed
your letter into the fire. You are
knocked out of the round.

7: countess wilhelmina
Always on the prowl for a handsome
man or juicy gossip, Wilhelmina's age
and noble blood make her one of Princess
Annette's friends. While she has great
influence over the princess, she makes
herself scarce whenever the king or
prince are around.
Unlike other cards, which take
effect when discarded, the text on
the Countess applies while she is
in your hand. In fact, she has no
effect when you discard her.
If you ever have the Countess
and either the King or Prince in
your hand, you must discard the
Countess. You do not have to reveal
the other card in your hand. Of
course, you can also discard the
Countess even if you do not have a
royal family member in your hand.
She likes to play mind games....

6: king arnaud iv
The undisputed ruler of Tempest... for
the moment. Because of his role in the
arrest of Queen Marianna, he does not
rate as highly with Princess Annette as a
father should. He hopes to work himself
back into her graces.
When you discard King Arnaud IV,
trade the card in your hand with
the card held by another player of
your choice. You cannot trade with
a player who is out of the round,
nor with someone protected by the
Handmaid. If all other players still
in the round are protected by the
Handmaid, this card does nothing.

5: prince arnaud
As a social gadfly, Prince Arnaud was
not as distressed over his mother's arrest
as one would suppose. Since many women
clamor for his attention, he hopes to help
his sister find the same banal happiness
by playing the matchmaker.
When you discard Prince Arnaud,
choose one player still in the round
(including yourself). That player
discards his or her hand (do not
apply its effect) and draws a new
card. If the deck is empty, that
player draws the card that was
removed at the start of the round.
If all other players are protected
by the Handmaid, you must choose
yourself.

4: handmaid susannah
Few would trust a handmaid with
a letter of importance. Fewer still
understand Susannah's cleverness, or
her skilled ability at playing the foolish
handmaid. That the queen's confidante
and loyal servant escaped any attention
after the queen's arrest is a testament to
her clever mind.
When you discard the Handmaid,
you are immune to the effects of
other players' cards until the start
of your next turn. If all players
other than the player whose turn it
is are protected by Susannah, the
player must choose him- or herself
if possible.

3: baron talus
The scion of an esteemed house that has
long been a close ally of the royal family,
Baron Talus has a quiet and gentle
demeanor that conceals a man used to
being obeyed. His suggestions are treated
as if they came from the king himself.
When discarded, choose one other
player still in the round. You and
that player secretly compare your
hands. The player with the lower
rank is knocked out of the round.
In case of a tie, nothing happens. If
all other players still in the round
are protected by the Handmaid,
this card does nothing.

2: priest tomas
Open, honest, and uplifting, Father
Tomas always seeks out the opportunity
to do good. With the arrest of the queen,
he is often seen about the palace, acting
as confessor, counselor, and friend.
When you discard the Priest,
you can look at one other player's
hand. Do not reveal the hand to all
players.

1: guard odette
Charged with seeing to the security of
the royal family, Odette follows her
orders with persistence and diligence...
even though her mentor is said to
have drowned while fleeing arrest for
complicity in the queen's treason.
When you discard the Guard,
choose a player and name a card
(other than Guard). If that player
has that card, that player is
knocked out of the round. If all
other players still in the round are
protected by the Handmaid, this
card does nothing.

COPYRIGHT & CONTACT:
2012 by Alderac Entertainment Group.
Tempest, Love Letter, and all related marks
are TM and  Alderac Entertainment
Group, Inc. All rights reserved. Printed in
China.
Warning: Choking hazard! Not for use by
children under 3 years of age.
For more information, visit:
www.alderac.com/tempest and
www.alderac.com/forum
Questions? CustomerService@alderac.com

CREDITS:
love letter
Design: Seiji Kanai
Development: Edward Bolme
Graphic Design: Kalissa Fitzgerald
Art: Andrew Hepworth, Jeffrey Himmelman
Writing: Edward Bolme, Seth Mason
Editing: Nicolas Bongiu, Jeff Quick
Layout: Kalissa Fitzgerald
Typesetting: Edward Bolme, Kalissa
Fitzgerald
Production: Dave Lepore
Playtesting: Rachel Bolme, Talon Bolme, Jeff
Plummer, Courtney Shelton, Lee Shelton
tempest
Original Concept: Mark Wootton, John Zinser
Brand Management: Edward Bolme
Fiction: Seth Mason



GAME NAME:
DOMINION

You are a monarch, like your parents before you, a ruler of a small pleasant kingdom of
rivers and evergreens. Unlike your parents, however, you have hopes and dreams! You
want a bigger and more pleasant kingdom, with more rivers and a wider variety of
trees. You want a Dominion! In all directions lie fiefs, freeholds, and feodums. All are
small bits of land, controlled by petty lords and verging on anarchy. You will bring
civilization to these people, uniting them under your banner.
But wait! It must be something in the air; several other monarchs have had the exact
same idea. You must race to get as much of the unclaimed land as possible, fending
them off along the way. To do this you will hire minions, construct buildings, spruce
up your castle, and fill your treasury. Your parents wouldn't be proud, but your
grandparents, on your mother's side, would be delighted.
Donald X. Vaccar

Before the first game, remove the five sets of cards from their wrappings and place them in the card
tray. One side of the included inlay suggests a way to organize the cards. The opposite side allows
players to create an organization that fits their needs.
- 500 cards
- 130 Treasure cards
- 60 Copper 40 Silver 30 Gold
- 48 Victory cards
- 24 Estates 12 Duchies 12 Provinces
- 30 Curse cards 32 Randomizer cards 1 Trash card
- 7 blank cards
This is a game of building a deck of cards. The deck is your Dominion. It contains your resources,
victory points, and the things you can do. It starts out a small sad collection of Estates and Coppers,
but you hope by the end of the game it will be brimming with Gold, Provinces, and the inhabitants
and structures of your castle and kingdom.
The player with the most victory points in his Deck at game end wins.

- 252 Kingdom cards
- 24 Action cards (10 of each)
Most kingdom cards are action
cards, but there are other kinds.
- 1 Victory card (12)

TREASURE CARDS:
Copper, Silver, and Gold cards are the
basic Treasure cards, and they are available
in every game. After each player takes 7
Copper cards, place the remaining Copper
cards and all of the Silver cards and Gold
cards in face-up piles in the Supply.

VICTORY CARDS:
Estate, Duchy, and Province cards are the
basic Victory cards, and they are available
in every game. After each player takes 3
Estate cards, place 12 each of the Estate,
Duchy, and Province cards in face-up piles
in the Supply in a 3 or 4 player game.
In a 2 player game, place only 8 of each
of these Victory cards in the Supply. Place
unused Victory cards back in the box.

CURSE CARDS & TRASH CARD:
Place 10 Curse cards in the Supply for a 2
player game, 20 Curse cards for 3 players,
and 30 Curse cards for 4 players. Return
unused Curse cards to the box. Curse
cards are used most often with specific
Action cards (e.g. Witch). If a player buys
a Curse card (0 cost), it goes in his own
discard pile, like any other gained card.
This, of course, will not often occur.
The Trash card marks the place where
players place cards trashed in the game.
Place the Treasure cards, Victory cards, Curse cards, and the Trash card in every game (players
may place them as shown or in any other arrangement that is convenient for them.
Note: Curse cards
are present in
every game,
however, they are
rarely used in the
basic game other
than with the
Witch card.
each player starts with 10 cards:
Each player
starts the
game with
the same
cards:
7 coppers
&
3 estates.
Each player
shuffles these
cards and places
them (his Deck)
face-down in his
play area (the
area near him
on the table).
Now, each
player draws
5 cards from
his Deck. These
cards are the
player's
hand.

KINGDOM CARDS:
In addition to the Trash, Treasure, Victory,
and Curse cards that are used in every
game, the players also select 10 Kingdom
cards and place 10 of each in face-up piles
on the table.
Exception: Kingdom Victory card piles
(e.g. Gardens) have the same number as
the Victory card piles (12 for a 3 or 4
player game and 8 for a 2 player game).
For the first game, we recommend using
the following 10 Kingdom cards: Cellar,
Market, Militia, Mine, Moat, Remodel,
Smithy, Village, Woodcutter, and
Workshop. At the end of the rules, we list
more suggestions for sets of 10 Kingdom
cards. Return Kingdom cards not chosen
for the game to the box.
In later games, players can choose the 10
Kingdom cards using any method they
agree on.
For example, the players can shuffle the
Randomizer cards for all Kingdom cards and
draw 10 to select the cards for the game. Or,
players can take turns selecting cards.
Players may also use the Randomizer cards
as Placeholders to mark the card piles so
empty piles are easily seen.
Place 10 sets of the 25 different Kingdom cards next to the Treasure, Victory, Curse, and Trash
cards to start each game. Thus, each game can have a different set of 10 cards. Kingdom cards
example of a player's play area during the game:
Deck cards played this turn Discard pile
(always face-down) (always face-up)
Players choose starting player
randomly or based on previous
game. Players take turns in
clockwise order.
Each turn, the player does the
A, B, and C phases in order:
A) Action phase
B) Buy phase
C) Clean-up phase
The player may play one action
card if he has one. This is
optional, even if the player has
an action card, he need not play
it. Action cards will allow
players to do extra things
during their turns.
As some action cards offer a
player additional actions, a
player may be able and choose
to play several action cards in a
turn. Players can play their
action cards left to right in their
play areas. In this way, they can
easily keep track of what and
how many extra things they
may do. The player will discard
these cards in the clean-up
phase (see below), and should
not be discarded prior to this.
Note: as the players begin the
game with no action cards, they
will be unable to play action
cards for at least the first two
turns.
+ X Card(s): must draw X more Cards immediately

STARTING PLAYER:
Randomly determine the starting player. When playing multiple
games, the starting player is the player to the left of the winner of
the last game. If there was a tie in the previous game, randomly
choose the starting player from the players that didn't win. Players
take turns in clockwise order.

TURN OVERVIEW:
Each turn has three phases (A, B, and C) in the order shown:
A) Action phase - the player may play an Action.
B) Buy phase - the player may buy a card.
C) Clean-up phase - the player must discard both played and
unplayed cards and draws five new cards.
After a player completes all three phases, his turn ends.

ACTION PHASE:
In the Action phase, the player may play one Action card. Action
cards are the Kingdom cards that say "Action" at the bottom of the
card. Since players do not start the game with any Action cards in
their initial Decks of 10 cards, a player will not have any Actions to
play during his first 2 turns. Normally, a player may play only one
Action card, but this number may be modified by the Action cards
that the player plays.
To play an Action, the player takes an Action card from his hand
and lays it face-up in his play area. He announces which card he is
playing and follows the instructions written on that card from top
to bottom. The player may still play an Action card even if he is not
able to do everything the Action card tells him to do; but the
player must do as much as he can. Furthermore, the player must
fully resolve an Action card before playing another one (if he is
able to play another Action card). Detailed information about
card abilities can be found in the card descriptions at the end of
these rules. Any Action cards played remain in the player's play
area until the Clean-up phase of the turn unless otherwise
indicated on the card.
The Action phase ends when the player cannot or chooses not to
play any more Action cards. Generally, a player can only play
Action cards during the Action phase of his turn. However,
Reaction cards are an exception to this rule as they can be used
at other times.
Common terms used on the Action cards:
"+X Card(s)"  the player immediately draws X number of cards from his
Deck. If there are not enough cards in his Deck, he draws as many as he
can, shuffles the Discard pile to form a new Deck, and then draws the
rest. If he still does not have enough cards left after forming a new Deck,
he just draws as many as he can.
7
+ X Action(s): can play X more
Actions in Action phase
If a card gives the player more
than one additional Action, it is
helpful to keep track of the
number of Actions he has
remaining out loud.
+ X : can spend X more coins
this turn
+1 Buy: can buy 1 more card in
Buy phase
Discard: put cards face-up in
your Discard pile
Trash: put card(s) in the Trash
pile
Gain: take a card and put it in
your Discard pile
Reveal: show card(s) and return
them to where they came from
Set Aside: put cards aside until
the instructions indicate where
they go
The player can gain one card
from the Supply by buying it -
paying the cost shown on the
card. The player pays in coins
from Treasure cards (the
number on the coin) and from
previously paid Action cards.
The player may use any
combination of Treasure cards
from his hand and coins shown
on Action cards played this
turn.
"+X Action(s)"  the player may play X number of additional Actions this
turn. +X Action(s) adds to the number of Actions that can be played in the
Action phase. It does not mean play another Action immediately. The
instructions on the current Action card must be completed before playing
any additional Actions. The player must complete all of his Actions before
he moves on to the Buy phase of his turn. If a card gives the player more
than one additional Action, he may keep track of the number of Actions he
has remaining out loud.
"+ X "  the player has X number of additional coins to spend in the Buy
phase. The player does not take additional Treasure cards for these coins.
"+1 Buy"  the player may buy an additional card from the Supply during
the Buy phase of his turn. +1 Buy adds to a player's potential Buys, it
does not allow the player to buy a card during the Action phase.
"Discard"  unless otherwise specified, discarded cards are from the player's
hand. When a player discards a card, he places the discarded card face-up
onto his Discard pile. When discarding several cards at once, the player
need not show all cards he is discarding to his opponents, but player may
need to show how many cards he is discarding (for example, when
playing the Cellar). The top card of a player's Discard pile is always visible.
"Trash"  when a player trashes a card, he places it in the Trash pile, not his
Discard pile. Trashed cards are not returned to the Supply and are not
available for purchase.
"Gain"  when a player gains a card, he takes the gained card (usually from
the Supply) and puts it onto his Discard pile (unless the card says to put
it elsewhere). The player does not get to use the card when he gains it.
"Reveal"  when a player reveals a card, he shows a card to all players and
then returns it to wherever it came from (unless instructed specifically to
put it elsewhere). If the player is required to reveal cards from the top of
his Deck, and he does not have enough cards, he shuffles in order to
reveal the required number of cards.
"Set Aside"  when a player sets aside a card, he places it face-up on the
table (unless otherwise indicated) without following any instructions on
the card. An Action that requires a player to set aside cards will instruct
him on what to do with these cards.

BUY PHASE:
In the Buy phase, the player can gain one card from the Supply by
paying its cost. Any card that is in the Supply may be purchased
(Treasure, Victory, Kingdom, and even Curse cards). The player
may not purchase cards from the Trash pile. Normally, a player
may buy only one card, but he may buy more if he played certain
cards earlier in his Action phase.
The cost of a card is in its lower left corner. The player may play
some or all of the Treasure cards from his hand to his play area
and add to their value the coins provided by Action cards played
this turn. The player may then gain any card in the Supply of equal
or lesser value. He takes the purchased card from its Supply pile
and places it face-up on his Discard pile. He my not use the ability
of the card when it is gained.
please visit our website:
www.riograndegames.com
Any Treasure cards played can
be placed in his player area
from left to right, adding them
to any cards previously played
this turn.
All these cards will be discarded
at the end of the turn, and
should not be discarded prior
to the Clean-up phase (see
below).
The player places all cards in his
play area onto his Discard pile.
This will include all Action cards
and Treasure cards he played
during this turn. He also places
all cards left in his hand onto
his Discard pile.
Draw 5 cards from his Deck.
The player's turn is over. Play
passes clockwise.
Game end
1) Province card pile is empty
or
2) any 3 Supply piles are empty
Players count their victory
points.
Most victory points wins.
Ties go to the player with the
fewest turns

If the player has multiple Buys, he combines Treasure cards and
any coins available from Action cards to pay for all of the
purchases. For example, if Tyler has +1 Buy and 6 coins provided
by two Gold cards, he can buy a Cellar costing 2, placing it face-up
in his Discard pile. Then, he can buy a Smithy with the remaining
4 coins and place that face-up in his Discard pile. If he wants to
use all 6 coins to buy one card, he can buy a Copper (for free) with
his second Buy or not buy a second card. Players do not have to
use any or all of their Buys.
The Treasure cards remain in the play area until the Clean-up
phase. Treasure cards will be used multiple times during the game.
Although they are discarded during the Clean-up phase, the player
will draw them again as his Discard pile is shuffled into a new
Deck. Thus, Treasure cards are a source of income, not a resource
that is used up when played. When played, Coppers are worth
1 coin, Silvers are worth 2 coins, and Golds are worth 3 coins.

CLEAN-UP PHASE:
All cards gained this turn should already be in the player's Discard
pile. The player places any cards that are in his play area (Action
cards that have been played in the Action phase as well as Treasure
cards that have been played in the Buy phase) and any cards
remaining in his hand onto his Discard pile. Although the player
need not show the cards remaining in his hand to his opponents,
since he places the cards in the Discard pile face-up, his opponents
will always be able to see the top-most card of his Discard pile.
Then, the player draws a new hand of 5 cards from his Deck. If
there are not enough cards in his Deck, he draws as many as he
can, shuffles his Discard pile to form a new face-down Deck, and
then draws the rest of his new hand.
Once the player has drawn a new hand of 5 cards, the next player
starts his turn. To speed play, players may begin their turns while
previous players are completing their Clean-up phases. When
someone plays an Attack card, the players must complete their
Clean-up phases in order to properly resolve the Attack.
The game ends at the end of any player's turn when either:
1) the Supply pile of Province cards is empty or
2) any 3 Supply piles are empty.
Each player puts all of his cards into his Deck and counts the
victory points on all the cards he has.
The player with the most victory points wins. If the highest
scores are tied at the end of the game, the tied player who has
had the fewest turns wins the game. If the tied players have had
the same number of turns, they rejoice in their shared victory.
The first few turns - how your first game might go
before the game
Deck hand cards card-playing area Discard pile
Shuffle your starting 10 cards (7 Coppers & 3 Estates) and place them face-down as your Deck. Draw the top
5 cards as your starting hand. In this example, you have 1 Estate & 4 Coppers. The rest remain as your Deck.
empty empty
Deck hand cards cards played Discard pile
As you have no action cards to start the game, you skip the action phase and go directly to the buy phase,
where you will buy most of your cards. You play 4 Copper cards from your hand to buy a
Remodel card (cost = 4 Coins) from the supply, placing it in your Discard pile. from the supply
Deck hand cards cards played Discard pile
After completing your Buy, you go to the Clean-up phase. Here you place the cards
you played on the discard pile and the cards left in your hand there as well.
Deck hand cards card-playing area Discard pile
Finally, you draw 5 cards from your Deck for your next turn. This time, you get 2 Estates and 3 Coppers.
Your 1st turn is over and the opponent on your left begins his turn.
After your opponents complete their turns, it is your 2nd turn. Again, you have no action cards,
so you go directly to the Buy phase. This time, you play your 3 Copper cards
to Buy a Silver card, placing it on your Discard pile.
In your Clean-up phase, you place the 3 Coppers you played on your Discard pile
and the 2 Estate cards left in your hand there as well.
Finally, you draw 5 cards from your Deck for your next turn. As your Deck is empty, so you shuffle
your Discard pile, place it face-down, and draw 5 cards from it. This time, you get 1 Estate, 1 Silver,
2 Coppers, and 1 Remodel. Your 2nd turn is over and the opponent on your left begins his turn.
Deck hand cards card played Discard pile
After your opponents complete their turns, you begin your 3rd turn with the Action phase and play the Remodel
card. You decide to trash the Estate from your hand and Gain a Smithy from the
supply (cost = 4 Coins = cost of Estate + 2 Coins), placing it on your Discard pile.
You have 4 Coins in your hand for the Buy phase. You play the 4 Coins (2 Copper cards and 1 Silver card) and decide
to Buy a Militia card from the Supply, placing it in your Discard pile.
from the supply
After completing your Buy, you go to the Clean-up phase.
Here you place the cards you played on the discard pile.
Finally, you draw 5 cards from your Deck for your next turn. This time, you get 2 Estates and 3 Coppers.
Your 3rd turn is over and the opponent on your left begins his turn.
Each player has his own
Dominion, built from the cards
in the supply.
Shuffle only when new cards
needed.
A player does not shuffle his
discard pile until all cards in his
Deck have been drawn or
revealed.
Gained cards go on the player's
discard pile.
All hand and played cards are
discarded at the end of a turn.
Players may count cards in
Decks and Supply piles and may
look at cards in Trash.
Use turn order to resolve card
affects.
Player allowed at least 1 Action
and 1 Buy.
All Action cards alter the rules
in some way.
Players may not add coins to
increase the affect of an Action
beyond the instructions.
Each player has his own Dominion, which he builds from cards in
the supply. During the game, a player's cards are usually in three
parts: his Deck (which he draws cards from), his hand, and his
Discard pile. The player draws cards from his own Deck and
discards cards to his own Discard pile. When his Deck is exhausted
and the player needs to draw or reveal cards from his Deck, he
shuffles his Discard pile to reform his Deck. He does not shuffle
his Discard pile until he needs to reveal or draw a card from his
Deck and cannot. At any point in the game, if a player has to draw
or reveal more cards than are remaining in his Deck, he must draw
or reveal as many as he can and then shuffle his face-up Discard
pile to form a new face-down Deck. Then, he draws or reveals the
remaining number of cards from his newly shuffled Deck.
A player places cards he Buys or otherwise acquires during the
game on his Discard pile unless he is specifically directed to place
them elsewhere.
At the end of a player's turn, he places all the cards he played and
those still in his hand on his Discard pile.
A player is allowed to count how many cards are left in his Deck,
but not in his Discard pile. A player may not look through his Deck
or his Discard pile. A player may look through the Trash pile, and
players may count the number of cards left in any pile in the
Supply.
If an ability of a card affects multiple players, and the order
matters, resolve that ability for each affected player in turn order,
starting with the player whose turn it is.
During each turn, a player is allowed 1 Action and 1 Buy, but may
be entitled to more based on Action cards played. The instructions
written on all the action cards alter the rules of the game by, for
example, allowing the player to draw more cards from his Deck,
play more Action cards in the Action phase, use more coins for the
Buy phase, Buy extra cards in the Buy phase, and so on.
When an Action card allows a player to gain a card costing up to
a certain value, he may not add coins from his hand or other
action cards to gain a higher-valued card.
Adventurer  If you have to shuffle in the middle, shuffle. Don't
shuffle in the revealed cards as these cards do not go to the
Discard pile until you have finished revealing cards. If you run
out of cards after shuffling and still only have one Treasure, you
get just that one Treasure.
Bureaucrat  If you have no cards left in your Deck when you
play this card, the Silver you gain will become the only card in
your Deck. Similarly, if another player has no cards in his Deck,
the Victory card he puts on top will become the only card in his
Deck.
Cellar  You can't discard Cellar to itself, since it isn't in your
hand any longer when you resolve it. You choose what cards to
discard and discard them all at once. You only draw cards after
you have discarded. If you have to shuffle to do the drawing, the
discarded cards will end up shuffled into your new Deck.
Chancellor  You must resolve the Chancellor (decide whether or
not to discard your Deck by flipping it into your Discard pile)
before doing other things on your turn, like deciding what to
buy or playing another Action card. You may not look through
your Deck as you discard it.
Chapel  You can't trash the Chapel itself since it isn't in your
hand when you resolve it. You could trash a different Chapel card
if that card were in your hand.
Council Room  The other players must draw a card whether
they want to or not. All players should shuffle as necessary.
Feast  The gained card goes into your Discard pile. It has to be a
card from the Supply. You cannot use coins from Treasures or
previous Actions (like the Market) to increase the cost of the
card that you gain. If you use Throne Room on Feast, you will
gain two cards, even though you can only trash Feast once.
Gaining the card isn't contingent on trashing Feast; they're just
two things that the card tries to make you do.
Festival  If you are playing multiple Festivals, keep a careful
count of your Actions. Say how many you have left out loud; this
trick works every time (i.e. "I'm playing the Festival and now
have two Actions remaining. I play a Market and have two
Actions remaining. I play another Festival and now have three
Actions remaining....").
Gardens  This Kingdom card is a Victory card, not an Action
card. It does nothing until the end of the game, when it is worth
1 victory point per 10 cards in your Deck (counting all of your
cards  your Discard pile and hand are combined with your Deck
before scoring). Round down; if you have 39 cards, Gardens is
worth 3 victory points. During set-up, place 12 Gardens in the
Supply for a 3 or 4 player game and 8 in the Supply for a 2
player game.
Laboratory  Draw two cards. You may play another Action card
during your Action phase.
Library  If you have to shuffle in the middle, the set-aside cards
are not shuffled into the new Deck. They will be discarded when
you have finished drawing cards. If you run out of cards even
after shuffling, you just get however many there were. You are
not obligated to set aside Actions  you just have the option to
do so. If you have 7 or more cards in hand after you play the
Library, you don't draw any cards.
Market  Draw a card. You may play another Action card during
your Action phase. During your Buy phase, you may buy an
additional card from the supply, and add one coin to the total
value of the Treasure cards played.
Militia  The attacked players discard cards until they have only
3 cards in hand. Players who had 3 or fewer cards in hand when
Militia was played do not discard any cards.
Mine  Generally, you can trash a Copper card and gain a Silver,
or trash a Silver card and gain a Gold. However, you could also
trash a Treasure to gain the same Treasure or a cheaper one. The
gained card goes in your hand; thus, you can spend it the same
turn. If you don't have a Treasure card in your hand to trash, you
can't gain anything.
Moat  An Attack card is one that says "Attack" on the bottom
line (usually, "Action - Attack"). When someone else plays an
Attack card, you may reveal the Moat by showing it from your
hand to the other players and then returning it to your hand
(before the Attack card resolves). You are then unaffected by that
Attack card. You won't gain a Curse because of a Witch or reveal
a card to a Spy, and so on. It's just like you aren't in the game for
purposes of resolving that Attack. Moat doesn't stop anything
an Attack does to other players or to the player of the Attack; for
example, if everyone else Moats a Witch, the person who played
it still gets to draw 2 cards. Moat can also be played on your
turn as an Action to draw 2 cards.
Moneylender  If you do not have a Copper in your hand to
trash, you don't get the +3 coins to spend in the Buy phase.
Remodel  You cannot trash the Remodel as it isn't in your hand
when you resolve it (you can trash a different Remodel card
from your hand). If you do not have a card to trash, you cannot
gain a card from the Remodel. The gained card goes in your
Discard pile. You can only gain cards from the Supply. The gained
card need not cost exactly 2 coins more than the trashed card; it
can cost that much or any amount less. You cannot use coins
from Treasures or previous Actions (like the Market) to increase
the cost of the card you gain. You can trash a card to gain a copy
of the same card.
Smithy  Draw three cards.
Spy  Spy causes all players, including the one who played it, to
reveal the top card of their Deck. Note that you draw your card
for playing Spy before any cards are revealed. Anyone who does
not have any cards left in their Deck shuffles in order to have
something to reveal. Anyone who still has no cards to reveal
doesn't reveal one. If players care about the order in which
things happen for this, you do yourself first, then each other
player in turn order. Revealed cards that aren't discarded are
returned to the top of their players' Decks.
Thief  A player with just one card left reveals that last card and
then shuffles to get the other card to reveal (without including
the revealed card); a player with no cards left shuffles to get both
of them. A player who still doesn't have two cards to reveal after
shuffling just reveals what he can. Each player trashes one
Treasure card at most, of the attacker's choice from the two
revealed cards, and then you gain any of the trashed cards that
you want. You can only take Treasures just trashednot ones
trashed on previous turns. You can take none of them, all of
them, or anything in between. Put the Treasures you decided to
gain into your Discard pile. The ones you choose not to gain stay
in the Trash pile.
Throne Room  You pick another Action card in your hand, play
it, and play it again. The second use of the Action card doesn't
use up any extra Actions you have. You completely resolve
playing the Action the first time before playing it the second
time. If you Throne Room a Throne Room, you play an Action,
doing it twice, and then play another Action and do it twice; you
do not resolve an Action four times. If you Throne Room a card
that gives you +1 Action, such as Market, you will end up with 2
please visit our website:
www.riograndegames.com
Illustration: Matthias Catrein
Developers: Valerie Putman &
Dale Yu
Our thanks to our playtesters:
Kelly Bailey, Dan Brees, Josephine
Burns, Max Crowe, Ray Dennis,
David Fair, Lucas Hedgren,
Michael M. Landers, W. Eric
Martin, Destry Miller, Miikka
Notkola, Molly Sherwin, Sir
Shufflesalot, P. Colin Street, Chris
West, the 6am Gamers, the
Cincygamers and the Columbus
Area Boardgaming Society.

Actions left afterwards, which is tricky, because if you'd just
played Market twice you'd only have 1 Action left afterwards.
Remember to count the number of Actions you have remaining
out loud to keep from getting confused! You cannot play any
other Actions in between playing the Throne Roomed Action
twice.
Village  If you're playing multiple Villages, keep a careful count
of your Actions. Say how many you have left out loud; this trick
works every time.
Witch  If there aren't enough Curses left to go around when
you play the Witch, you deal them out in turn order  starting
with the player after you. If you play Witch with no Curses
remaining, you will still draw 2 cards. A player gaining a Curse
puts it face-up into his Discard pile.
Woodcutter  During your Buy phase, you add two coins to the
total value of the Treasure cards played, and you may buy an
additional card from the Supply.
Workshop  The card you gain is put into your Discard pile. It
has to be a card from the Supply. You cannot use coins from
Treasures or previous Actions (like the Market) to increase the
cost of the card you may gain.
You can play Dominion with any set of 10 Kingdom cards, but
these sets are intended to highlight some interesting card
interactions and game strategies.
First Game: Cellar, Market, Militia, Mine, Moat, Remodel,
Smithy, Village, Woodcutter, Workshop.
Big Money: Adventurer, Bureaucrat, Chancellor, Chapel, Feast,
Laboratory, Market, Mine, Moneylender, Throne Room
Interaction: Bureaucrat, Chancellor, Council Room, Festival,
Library, Militia, Moat, Spy, Thief, Village
Size Distortion: Cellar, Chapel, Feast, Gardens, Laboratory,
Thief, Village, Witch, Woodcutter, Workshop
Village Square: Bureaucrat, Cellar, Festival, Library, Market,
Remodel, Smithy, Throne Room, Village, Woodcutter



GAME NAME:
Ticket to Ride

On a blustery autumn evening five old friends met in the backroom of one of the city's oldest and most private clubs. Each had
traveled a long distance  from all corners of the world  to meet on this very specific day... October 2, 1900  28 years to the
day that the London eccentric, Phileas Fogg accepted and then won a 20,000 bet that he could travel Around the World in 80 Days.
When the story of Fogg's triumphant journey filled all the newspapers of the day, the five attended University together. Inspired by
his impetuous gamble, and a few pints from the local pub, the group commemorated his circumnavigation with a more modest excursion and wager  a bottle of good claret to the first to make it to Le Procope in Paris.
Each succeeding year, they met to celebrate the anniversary and pay tribute to Fogg. And each year a new expedition (always more
difficult) with a new wager (always more expensive) was proposed. Now at the dawn of the century it was time for a new impossible journey. The stakes: $1 Million in a winner-takes-all competition. The objective: to see which of them could travel by rail to the
most cities in North America  in just 7 days. The journey would begin immediately...
Ticket to Ride is a cross-country train adventure. Players compete to connect different cities by laying claim to railway routes on a
map of North America.
For 2 - 5 players
ages 8 and above
30 - 60 minutes

COMPONENTS:
- 1 Board map of North American train routes
- 240 Colored Train Cars (45 each in Blue, Red, Green, Yellow and Black, plus some extra replacement cars in each color)
- 144 Illustrated cards:
- 1 Promotional card for additional maps
- 1 Days of Wonder Promotional card
- 5 Wooden Scoring Markers (1 for each player in Blue, Red, Green, Yellow
and Black)
- 1 Rules booklet
- 1 Days of Wonder Online access number

SETTING UP THE GAME:
Place the board map in the center of the table. Each player takes a set of 45 Colored
Train Cars along with its matching Scoring Marker. Each player places his Scoring
Marker on Start on the Scoring Track running along the map's border. Throughout
the game, each time a player scores points, he will advance his marker accordingly.
Shuffle the Train Car cards and deal a starting hand of 4 cards to each player ?.
Place the remaining deck of Train Car cards near the board and turn the top five cards
from the deck face-up.
Place the Longest Path Bonus card face up next to the board.
Shuffle the Destination Ticket cards and deal 3 cards to each player. Each player
looks at their Destination Tickets and decides which ones they wish to keep. A player
must keep at least two, but may keep all three if he chooses. Any returned cards are
placed on the bottom of the Destination Ticket deck. This deck is then placed next to the
board. Players keep their Destination Tickets secret until the end of the game.
You are now ready to begin.

OBJECT OF THE GAME:
The object of the game is to score the highest number of total points. Points can be
scored by:
- Claiming a Route between two adjacent cities on the map;
- Successfully completing a Continuous Path of routes between two cities listed on your Destination Ticket(s);
- Completing the Longest Continuous Path of routes.
Points are lost if you do not successfully complete the route given on the Destination Ticket(s) you kept.

THE GAME TURN:
The player who is the most experienced traveler goes first. Play then proceeds clockwise around the table, each player taking one turn at a time until
the game ends. On his turn, a player must perform one (and only one) of the following three actions:

- 110 Train Car cards (12 each of Box, Passenger, Tanker, Reefer, Freight, Hopper, Coal, and Caboose cars, plus 14 Locomotives)
- 30 Destination Ticket cards
- 1 Summary card
- 1 Longest Continuous Path Bonus card

DRAW TRAIN CARDS:
The player may draw 2 Train Car cards. He may take any one of the face-up cards or he may draw the top card from the
deck (this is a blind draw). If he draws a face up card, he immediately turns a replacement card face-up from the deck. He then draws his second
card, either from the face up cards or from the top of the deck. (See Train Car Cards for special rules for Locomotive cards).
Claim a Route  The player may claim a route on the board by playing a set of Train Car cards that match the color and length of the route and
then placing one of his colored trains on each space of this route. He then records his score by moving his Scoring Marker the appropriate number
of spaces (see Route Scoring Table) along the Scoring Track on the board.

DRAW DESTINATION TICKETS:
The player draws 3 Destination Tickets from the top of the deck. He must keep at least one of them, but he may keep
two or all three if he chooses. Any returned cards are placed on the bottom of the deck.

TRAIN CAR CARDS:
There are 8 types of regular Train Car cards, plus Locomotive cars. The colors of each type of Train Car card match various routes
between cities on the board  Purple, Blue, Orange, White, Green, Yellow, Black, and
Red.
Locomotives are Multi-colored and act as a wild card that can be part of any set of
cards when claiming a route. If a Locomotive card is one of the five face-up cards, the
player who draws it may only draw one card, instead of two. If, after having drawn one
card the replacement card is a Locomotive, the player cannot take it. If at any time, three
of the five face-up cards are Locomotives, all five cards are immediately discarded and
five new ones are turned face-up to replace them.
Note: If a player is lucky enough to get a Locomotive from the top of the deck in a blind
draw, it stills counts as a single card and he may still draw a total of two cards that turn.
A player may have any number of cards in his hand at any time.
When the deck is exhausted, the discards are reshuffled into a new draw pile deck. The
cards should be shuffled thoroughly, since all the cards have been discarded in sets.
In the unlikely event that there are no cards left in the deck and there are no discards
(because players are hoarding many cards in their hands), a player cannot draw Train
Car cards. Instead he may only claim a route or draw Destination Ticket cards.

CLAIMING ROUTES:
To claim a route, a player must play a set of cards equal to the number of spaces in the
route. A set of cards must be of the same type. Most routes require a specific type of set.
For example a Blue route must be claimed using blue-colored Passenger Car cards. Some
routes  those that are Gray colored  can be claimed using a set of cards of any one color.
When a route is claimed, the player places one of his plastic trains in each of the spaces
of the route. All the cards in the set used to claim the route are then discarded.
A player may claim any open route on the board. He is never required to
connect to any of his previously played routes. A player may only claim
a maximum of one route, hence connect two adjacent cities, never more,
on his turn.
Some cities are connected by Double-Routes. One player cannot claim
both routes to the same cities.
Important Note: In 2 or 3 player games, only one of the Double-Routes
can be used. A player can claim either of the two routes between cities, but
the other route is then closed to other players.

To claim the route from Montral
to Toronto, a player could use any
set of Train Car cards, as a long
as they are the same type.
Example 2
To claim the route from Montral
to New York, a player would need
a set of three Blue Passenger
Car cards.


ROUTE SCORING TABLE:
When a player claims a route, he records the points he receives by
moving his Scoring Marker on the Scoring Track:

DRAWING DESTINATION TICKET CARDS:
A player can use his turn to draw more Destination Ticket cards. To do so, he draws 3 new cards from the top of the Destination Ticket Deck. He must
keep at least one of the cards, but may also keep two or all three if he chooses. If there are less than 3 Destination Tickets left in the deck, the player
only draws the cards that are available. Any returned cards are placed on the bottom of the Destination Ticket Deck.
Each Destination Ticket includes the name of two cities on the map and a Point Value. If a player successfully completes a series of routes that connect
the two cities, they will add the amount of points indicated on the Destination Ticket to their point totals at the end of the game. If they do not
successfully connect the two cities, they deduct the amount of points indicated.
Destination Tickets are kept secret from other players until the game's final scoring. A player may have any number of Destination Ticket cards during
the game.

GAME END:
When one player's stock of colored plastic trains gets down to only 0,1 or 2 trains left at the end of his turn, each player, including that player, gets
one final turn. The game then ends and players calculate their final scores.

CALCULATING SCORES:
Players should have already accounted for the points earned as they completed different routes. To make sure no mistakes were made, you may
want to re-count the points for each player's routes.
Players should then reveal all their Destination Tickets and add (or subtract) the value of their Destination Tickets still in hand, based on whether
they successfully (or not) connected those cities together.
The player who has the Longest Continuous Path of routes receives this special bonus card and adds 10 points to his score. When evaluating and
comparing path lengths, only take into account continuous lines of plastic trains of the same color. A continuous path may include loops, and pass
through the same city several times, but a given plastic train may never be used twice in the same continuous path. In the case of a tie for the longest
path, all tied players score the 10 point bonus.
The player with the most points wins the game. If two or more players are tied for the most points, the player who has completed the most Destination
Tickets wins. In the unlikely event that they are still tied, the player with the Longest Continuous Path card wins.

CREDITS:
Game design by Alan R. Moon
Illustrations by Julien Delval
Graphic Design by Cyrille Daujean
A special thanks from Alan and DoW to all
those who helped play test the game:
Phil Alberg, Buzz Aldrich, Dave & Jenn Bernazzani,
Pitt Crandlemire, Terry Egan, Brian Fealy, Dave Fontes,
Matt Horn, Craig Massey, Janet Moon,
Mark Noseworthy, Mike Schloth, Eric Schultz,
Scott Simon, Rob Simons, Adam Smiles, Tony Soltis,
Richard Spoonts, Brian Stormont, Rick Thornquist
Days of Wonder, the Days of Wonder logo, Ticket to Ride -
the boardgame and Ticket to Ride Europe are all trademarks or
registered trademarks of Days of Wonder, Inc. and copyrights
2004-2015 Days of Wonder, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
WWW.DAYSOFWONDER.COM
Register your boardgame
Days of Wonder Online
Here is your train ticket to Days of Wonder
Online - The online board game
community where ALL your friends play!
Register your game at
www.daysofwonder.com to receive online
discounts and discover a web site full of
game variants, additional maps and more.
Simply click on the New Player button
and follow the instructions.
[T2R] rules EN reprint 2015_TTR2 rules US 06/03/15 17:36 Page1



GAME NAME:
Azul

GAME SETUP:
1. Give each player a player board (A). Flip your board to the side
with the colored wall. (See Variant Play to play with the gray
side of the player board). Each player must use the same side.
2. Take 1 scoring marker (B) and place it on space "0" of your
score track.
3. Place the Factory displays (C) in a circle around the
center of the table:
In a 2-player game, place 5 Factory displays.
In a 3-player game, place 7 Factory displays.
In a 4-player game, place 9 Factory displays.
4. Fill the bag (D) with the 100 tiles (20 of each color) (E).
5. The player who most recently visited Portugal takes the
starting player marker (F) and then fills each Factory
display with exactly 4 tiles randomly drawn from the bag.
Return any unused player boards, scoring markers and Factory
displays to the box.

Introduced by the Moors, azulejos (originally white and blue ceramic tiles)
were fully embraced by the Portuguese, when their king Manuel I, on a
visit to the Alhambra palace in Southern Spain, was mesmerized by the
stunning beauty of the Moorish decorative tiles. The king, awestruck by
the interior beauty of the Alhambra, immediately ordered that his own
palace in Portugal be decorated with similar wall tiles. Azul brings you,
a tile laying artist, to embellish the walls of the Royal Palace of Evora.
A GAME BY MICHAEL KIESLING

OBJECT OF THE GAME:
To be the player with the most points at the end of the game.
The game ends after the round in which at least one player has
completed a horizontal line of 5 consecutive tiles on her wall.

GAMEPLAY:
The game is played over multiple rounds, each of which is
composed of three phases:
A. Factory offer
B. Wall-tiling
C. Preparing the next round
A. Factory offer
The starting player places the starting player marker in the
center of the table and then takes the first turn. Play then
continues clockwise.
On your turn, you must pick tiles in one of the following ways:
EITHER
a) Pick all tiles of the same color from any one Factory display
and then move the remaining tiles from this Factory display
to the center of the table.
OR
b) Pick all tiles of the same color from the center of the table.
If you are the first player in this round to pick tiles from the
center of the table, also take the starting player marker and
place it onto the leftmost free space of your floor line.
1. On his turn, Peter picks
the 2 black tiles from a
Factory display and places
the remaining tiles in the
center of the table.
2. Martin picks the yellow
tile from a Factory display
and places the remaining
3 red tiles in the center
of the table.
3. Then, Andrea picks these 3 red
tiles from the center of the table. As
she is the first one to pick from the
center, she also takes the starting
player marker and places it on the
leftmost space of her floor line.
First turns example
Then, add the tiles you picked to one of the 5 pattern lines on
your player board (the first line has 1 space to hold 1 tile, the fifth
line has 5).
Place the tiles, one by one, from right
to left in your chosen pattern line.
If the pattern line already
holds tiles, you may only
add tiles of the same color to it.
Once all spaces of a pattern line are
filled, that line is considered complete. If you have picked up
more tiles than you can place in your chosen pattern line, you
must place the excess tiles in the floor line (see Floor line).
Your goal in this phase is to complete as many of your pattern
lines as you can, because during the following Wall-tiling phase,
you will only be able to move tiles from complete pattern lines to
their corresponding lines on your wall to score points.
Place tiles from right to left.

In all later rounds, you must also comply with the following
rule: You are not allowed to place tiles of a certain color in
a pattern line whose corresponding line of your wall already
holds a tile of that color.
Floor line
Any tiles you have picked that you cannot or do not want to place
according to the rules, you must place in your floor line, filling
its spaces from left to right. These tiles are considered as having
fallen on the floor and give minus points in the Wall-tiling phase.
If all spaces of your floor line are occupied, return any further
fallen tiles to the lid of the game box to store them for now.
This phase ends when the center of the table AND all Factory
displays contain no more tiles.
Then, continue with the Wall-tiling phase.
Andrea picks 2 yellow tiles from a Factory display.
She is not allowed to place them in her second or third pattern line, as
their corresponding wall lines each have a yellow tile.
She may not place them in the fourth pattern line either, as there is
already 1 blue tile and she may not add tiles of a different color to it.
She may, however, place 1 of them in the first pattern line and the excess
tile in the floor line.
Or she may place both tiles in the fifth pattern line.
She may even choose to place both tiles in the floor line.
Peter's second pattern line is complete with 2 red tiles. So he
moves the rightmost tile of this pattern line over to the red space
on the wall (and immediately scores 1 point, see Scoring).
As the third pattern line is not complete, he ignores it.
From his complete fourth pattern line, he moves the rightmost
blue tile over to the blue space on the wall (and scores 1 point
immediately).
He ignores the fifth pattern line, as it is not complete.
Afterwards, he removes the remaining tiles from the second and
fourth pattern lines and places them in the lid of the game box.
The tiles in his third and fifth pattern lines stay on his board.

COMPLETE WALL-TILING:
This phase can be carried out by all players simultaneously,
as they move tiles from their complete pattern lines over to
their walls.
Go through your pattern
lines from top to bottom.
Move the rightmost tile of
each complete line to the
space of the same color in
the corresponding line of
your wall. Each time you
move a tile, score points immediately (see Scoring).
Then, remove all tiles from any pattern lines that now
have no tile in the rightmost space. Place them into the
lid of the game box to store them for now.
Once that is done, any remaining tiles on the pattern lines
stay on your player board for the next round.
Finally, at the end of the Wall-tiling phase, check if you have any
tiles in your floor line. For each tile in your floor line, you lose
the number of points indicated directly above it. Adjust your
scoring marker on your score track accordingly (however, you
can never drop below 0 points).
Afterwards, remove all tiles in your floor line and place them
into the lid of the game box. Note: If you have the starting player
marker in your floor line, it counts as a normal tile there. But
instead of placing it in the lid, place it in front of you.
PREPARING THE NEXT ROUND:
If nobody has completed a horizontal line of 5 consecutive tiles
on her wall yet (see End of the game), prepare the next round.
The player with the starting player marker refills each of the
Factory displays with 4 tiles from the bag as in the setup. If the
bag is empty, refill it with all the tiles that you have placed in
the lid of the game box and then continue filling the remaining
Factory displays. Then, start the new round.
In the rare case that you run out of tiles again while there are
none left in the lid, start the new round as usual even though
not all Factory displays are properly filled.
Peter loses a total of 8 points as he has 4 tiles and the starting player
marker in his floor line.

SCORING:
Each tile you move over to your wall is always placed on the
space matching its color and immediately scores as follows:
If there are no tiles directly
adjacent (vertically or
horizontally) to the newly
placed tile, gain 1 point
on the score track.
If there are any tiles adjacent, however, do the following:
First check if there are 1 or more tiles horizontally linked
to the newly placed tile. If so, count all these linked tiles
(including the newly placed one) and gain that many points.
Then check if there are 1 or more tiles vertically linked to the
newly placed tile. If so, count all these linked tiles (including
the newly placed tile) and gain that many points.
Placing the
red tile gives
you 1 point.
In this example, placing the
yellow tile gives you not only
4 points for the horizontally
linked tiles but also 3 points
for the vertical ones.
In this example, placing the
yellow tile gives you 3 points
for the 3 horizontally
linked tiles (including
the newly placed
yellow tile).
In this example, placing the blue
tile gives you 3 points for the
vertically linked tiles.

CREDITS:
Game Design: Michael Kiesling
Producer: Sophie Gravel
Development: Viktor Kobilke &
Philippe Schmit
Art Direction: Philippe Gurin
Illustrations: Chris Quilliams
Graphic Design: Philippe Gurin,
Karla Ron &
Marie-Eve Joly
Communications: Mike Young
Foreign Affairs: Andrea Ahlers &
Katja Wienicke
Editing: Sophie Gravel,
Viktor Kobilke
Marketing: Martin Bouchard
Development by: 2018 Plan B Games Inc.
No part of this product may
be reproduced without specific permission.
19 rue de la Cooprative, Rigaud, QC. J0P 1P0, Canada.
info@nextmovegames.com
www.nextmovegames.com
Retain this information for your records.
Made in China.

END OF THE GAME:
The game ends right after the Wall-tiling phase in which at least
one player has completed at least one horizontal line of
5 consecutive tiles on her wall.
Once the game has ended, score additional points if you have
achieved the following goals:
 Gain 2 points for each complete horizontal line of
5 consecutive tiles on
your wall.
 Gain 7 points for each
complete vertical line of
5 consecutive tiles on
your wall.
 Gain 10 points for each
color of which you have
placed all 5 tiles on your wall.
The player with the most points on her score track wins the
game. In the case of a tie, the
tied player with more complete
horizontal lines wins the game.
If that does not break the tie,
the victory is shared.

VARIANT PLAY:
For a slightly different game, use the gray
side of the player boards. Rules are exactly
the same as in the normal game, except that
when you move a tile from a pattern line to
the wall, you may place it on any space of
its corresponding wall line. However, as the
game progresses, in each of the 5 vertical
lines of your wall, no color may appear more than once. Also keep
in mind that in each horizontal line, no color may appear more
than once either.
Special case: In the wall-tiling phase, it may happen that you are
not able to move the rightmost tile of a certain pattern line over
to the wall because there is no valid space left for it. In this case,
you must immediately place all tiles of that pattern line in your
floor line (see Floor line).




GAME NAME:
A Game of Thrones

OVERVIEW:
A Game of Thrones: The Board Game is a game for three to six
players, based on George R. R. Martins bestselling A Song of Ice
and Fire novels. In A Game of Thrones: The Board Game, players
each control one of six Great Houses seeking dominance over the
lands of Westeros. By mustering armies, conquering territory and
forming alliances, each House strives to control the most Castles
and Strongholds so it may ultimately claim the Iron Throne.
OBJECT OF THE GAME:
At the end of the 10th game round, the House that controls the
most areas containing either a Castle or Stronghold is declared the
winner. If, at any time during the game, a player controls seven such
areas, that player immediately wins the game.

COMPONENTS:
- This Rulebook
- 1 Game Board
- 138 Colored Plastic Units consisting of:
- 60 Footmen (10 per House)
- 30 Knights (5 per House)
- 36 Ships (6 per House)
- 12 Siege Engines (2 per House)
- 81 Large Cards consisting of:
- 42 House Cards (7 per House)
- 30 Westeros Cards
- 9 Wildling Cards
- 24 Small Tides of Battle Cards
- 2 Reference Sheets
- 6 House-specific Player Screens
- 266 Cardboard Tokens consisting of:
- 90 Order Tokens (15 per House)
- 120 Power Tokens (20 per House)
- 18 Influence Tokens (3 per House)
- 6 Supply Tokens (1 per House)
- 14 Neutral Force Tokens
- 6 Victory Point Tokens (1 per House)
- 6 Garrison Tokens (1 per House)
- 1 Iron Throne Token
- 1 Valyrian Steel Blade Token
- 1 Messenger Raven Token
- 1 Game Round Marker
- 1 Wildling Threat Token
- 1 Kings Court Overlay
The Iron Throne is mine by rights. All those who deny that are my
foes. - Stannis Baratheon
The whole of the realm denies it, brother. Old men deny it with their
death rattle, and unborn children deny it in their mothers wombs. They
deny it in Dorne and they deny it on the Wall. No one wants you for
their king... You may well have the better claim, but I have the larger
army. - Renly Baratheon
When you play the game of thrones, you win or you die.
- Cersei Lannister
Number of Players
A Game of Thrones: The Board Game supports three to six
players. If playing with three, four, or five players, first read this
entire rule book and then follow the instructions under Playing
with Fewer Than Six Players on page 28 .
A Game of Thrones
Component Overview
The following list briefly describes the components found in
A Game of Thrones: The Board Game.
Game Board
Displays the continent of Westeros and
several important game tracks.
Player Screens
Used by players as a reference guide
and to hide available Order tokens from
opponents.
Plastic Units
Footmen, Knights, Ships, and Siege Engine
units, representing the military might of
each House.
Order Tokens
Important commands issued by players to
units in areas on the game board.
Power Tokens
Represent political and economic influence
in Westeros. These are used in bidding and to
establish control of game board areas.
Influence Tokens
Used to indicate the position of each House on
the three Influence tracks.
Supply Tokens
Used on the Supply track to indicate the
maximum size and quantity of armies each player
can field on the game board.
Victory Point Tokens
Placed on the Victory track to indicate how
close each House is to winning the game.
Reference Sheets
Provide helpful reference information
about card and token effects in A Game of
Thrones: The Board Game.
Neutral Force Tokens
Represent the forces of independent
areas unwilling to submit to player control
without resistance.
Garrison Tokens
Represent the inherent defensive strength
of each players home area.
Dominance Tokens
Awarded to the dominant player on each
of the three Influence tracks on the game
board: the Iron Throne, the Fiefdoms, and
the Kings Court. These tokens provide their
owners with special abilities used at various
points in the game.
Game Round Marker
Tracks how many game rounds have been played.
House Cards
Represent important characters from
A Song of Ice and Fire called upon
during combat.
Westeros Cards
Represent random events and game procedures
that occur at the start of each game round.
Tides of Battle Cards
Optional game module that enhances the risks
and uncertainty of combat.
Wildling Cards and Threat Token
Tracks the strength and effects of attacks
against Westeros by the northern wildlings.
The Kings Court Overlay
Balances the availability of Special Order tokens in three and
four players games.
A Game of Thrones
Before playing the game, perform the following steps in order:
1. Prepare the Game Board: Unfold the game board and
place it in the center of the play area.
2. Prepare the Wildling Deck and Wildling Threat
Token: Shuffle the Wildling cards to form a deck. Place this deck
on the space provided at the top of the game board. Then place the
Wildling Threat token on the 2 position of the Wildlings track.
3. Prepare the Westeros Decks: Separate the Westeros
cards into decks according to their roman numeral (I, II, or III).
Shuffle each deck and place them separately facedown next to
the game board.
4. Place the Neutral Force Tokens: First collect the
Neutral Force tokens marked with the correct range of
players. Then place those tokens on the areas of the game
board matching the name on each token.
For example, in a three-player game, place only Neutral Force
tokens marked with the 3 icon.
Used only with
three players
Used with four or
five players
All Neutral Force tokens are double-sided. One side is used
exclusively when playing with three players. The reverse side is
used if the current number of players fall within the indicated
player range. After placing all necessary Neutral Force tokens,
return any unused tokens to the box.
When playing with four, five, or six players, not every Neutral
Force token is used. See Playing With Fewer Than 6 players on
page 28 for a complete list of which tokens to place.
5. Place Game Round Marker: Place the Game Round
marker on the 1 position of the Round track.
6. Determine Player Houses: Each player now selects which
House he wishes to control during the game (Stark, Lannister,
Greyjoy, Tyrell, Baratheon, or Martell). Alternatively, players
may randomly determine which House each player will control.
When playing a game with fewer than six players, some Houses
are not eligible to be played, see page 28.
7. Gather House Materials: Each player gathers all
materials belonging to his House. These are: 1 player screen,
7 House cards, 15 Order tokens, 1 Supply token, 3 Influence
tokens, 1 Victory Point token, 1 Garrison token, and all
plastic units of his color (do not take any House-specific
Power tokens yet).
8. Place Influence, Victory and Supply Tokens: Each player
places his Victory, Supply, and Influence tokens on the game
board tracks as instructed by his player screen. Unlike the
Influence tracks, more than one House may share the same
position on the Victory and Supply tracks.
If playing with fewer than six players, slide every Influence
token to the left (towards the 1 position) on each Influence
track to fill any leftward empty position (in other words, the
highest numbered positions on each track remains empty
and unused in games with fewer than six players). The Setup
Diagram on page 5 illustrates how Influence tokens have been
shifted left in a four-player game.
The Houses occupying each 1 (i.e., left-most) position on each
Influence track now claim the pictured Dominance token for
that track (the Iron Throne, the Valyrian Steel Blade, or the
Messenger Raven token).
9. Place Units: Each player then places all of his starting
units on the game board according to the instructions on his
player screen.
10. Place Garrison Tokens: Each player places his Garrison
token on his home area (matching the area name on the token).
11. Gather Power Tokens: Place all Power tokens (for
all Houses) in a central pile. This pile of Power tokens is
referred to as the Power Pool. Each player then takes five
Power tokens matching his House from the Power Pool.
The game is now ready to begin!
Exceeding the
Components Provided
Each House is provided a limited number of units,
tokens, and cards. If a player is using all his components of
a particular type, he may not bring additional components
of that type into play. Units that are destroyed in combat (or
removed from the board for any other reason) are available to
be mustered again.
GAME SETUP
A Game of Thrones
1. Game Board
2. Wildlings Track
3. Wildling Deck
4. Westeros Deck I
5. Westeros Deck II
6. Westeros Deck III
7. A Neutral Force Token
8. A Garrison Token
9. Round Track
10. Victory Track
11. Supply Track
12. Influence Tracks
13. Player Screens
14. House Cards (Player Hand)
15. House Cards (Discard Pile)
16. Order Tokens
17. Available Power Tokens
18. Power Pool
19. Dominance Tokens
20. Kings Court Overlay (3-4 players only)
Setup Diagram
(four-player example)

A Game of Thrones
The Player Screen
Each player takes the player screen that represents his
House. The player screen provides reference information, setup
information, and enables players to sort and store components
(such as Order tokens) privately during the game.
1. Order token reference
2. Starting units information
3. Starting position on Supply, Influence, and Victory tracks
4. House unit setup map (illustrating the starting units
information)

Important Terms!
Be sure to read and understand the following terms
before continuing:
Unit: A plastic Ship, Footman, Knight, or Siege
Engine. Other component types (including Garrisons,
Neutral Forces, or Influence tokens) are not units.
Area: A region of Westeros as depicted on the game
board and divided by white or red borders. An area is either
a sea area (red borders) or a land area (white borders).
Home Area: A land area containing the printed shield
of its House. For example, Winterfell is the home area of
House Stark.
Turn Order: Any game mechanic that operates in
turn order is resolved in the order of House position on
the Iron Throne Influence track. The first House (in the 1
position) always acts first, followed by the second House
(in the 2 position), etc.
House/Player: Interchangeably used in these rules
when referring to a player and/or the House he controls.
Enemy/Opponent: Describes any game component or
area controlled by another player, or describes the rival
player himself.
Friend/Friendly: Game components or game board
areas belonging to the same player.
Army/Armies: An army is defined as two or more
friendly units sharing the same sea or land area. A single
unit occupying an area is not considered an army (and is
therefore unaffected by changes in supply, see page 8).
Available Power: Power tokens in a players play area,
available to be bid or otherwise spent during gameplay.
Power tokens in the Power Pool are not considered available
power. For example, during game setup, each House receives
five Power tokens from the Power Pool. In this way, each House
has five available power at the beginning of the game.
Collect/Receive/Discard Power: When instructed
to receive or collect power, a player takes the indicated
number of Power tokens bearing his House insignia
from the communal Power Pool. When instructed to
discard power, the player takes the Power tokens from
his available power and returns them to the Power Pool.
A player may only collect, receive, or discard Power tokens
bearing the insignia of his own House.
Destroy: A unit that is destroyed during the game is
removed from the game board and returned to a players
available units in his play area.
Embattled Area: The area in which a combat currently
is taking place.
The Houses of Westeros
During the time of A Song of Ice and Fire in which A Game
of Thrones: The Board Game is set, the following Houses are the
principal players in the struggle for the Iron Throne.
House Stark Winter is Coming
A reclusive family with honorable traditions that has been
reluctantly pulled into the game of thrones.
House Greyjoy We Do Not Sow
Nurturing wounds from its failed rebellion, this bitter clan
has bided its time to once more launch its longships upon the
western coasts of Westeros.
House Lannister Hear Me Roar
An ambitious family whose rich gold mines and relentless
cunning has made them a formidable and dangerous
power in the realm.
House Martell Unbowed, Unbent, Unbroken
Fierce and unforgiving, this ancient family has thrived and
grown powerful under the scorching sun of Dorne.
House Tyrell Growing Strong
Even as their fertile lands are considered the heart of
chivalry in Westeros, this proud family has never sat
upon the Iron Throne; a fact it hopes to soon correct.
House Baratheon Ours is the Fury
The troubled but strong-willed family of Robert Baratheon,
the late King, holds the strongest claim of succession to the
Iron Throne.
A Game of Thrones
A Game of Thrones: The Board Game is played over 10 game rounds,
each consisting of the following three phases:
1. The Westeros Phase (skipped game round 1)
The top card of each Westeros deck is drawn, after which
each card is resolved in order (I, II, then III). Westeros cards
represent important game procedures and events.
2. The Planning Phase
Each player simultaneously assigns facedown Order tokens to
each area containing one or more of his units.
3. The Action Phase
The Order tokens assigned during the Planning Phase are now
resolved. The majority of player activity in A Game of Thrones:
The Board Game takes place during this phase.
After each Action Phase, a new game round begins, starting
with another Westeros Phase.
If at any time during the game a player controls seven areas
containing a Castle or Stronghold, the game is over and that
player is the winner. Otherwise, the game lasts until the end of
the 10th game round, at which point the player who controls the
most areas containing a Castle or Stronghold wins the game (see
Winning the Game on page 16).
The Westeros Phase
During this phase, players draw and resolve three Westeros
cards, one from each Westeros deck.
Note: Skip this phase during the first game round, proceed
instead directly to the Planning Phase.
The Westeros Phase consists of the following steps:
1. Advance Game Round Marker: Advance the Game
Round marker one position on the Game Round track.
If the Game Round marker was on the 10th space at the start of
the Westeros Phase, its not possible to advance the Game Round
marker. Instead, the game is over and a winner is determined
(see Winning the Game on page 16).
2. Draw Westeros Cards: Reveal the top card of all three
Westeros decks.
3. Advance Wildlings Track: Count
the number of Wildling icons on the
three revealed Westeros cards (if any) and
move the Wildling Threat token forward
that many spaces on the Wildlings track.
If, during this step, the Wildling Threat
token reaches position 12, a Wildling Attack is immediately
resolved (ignore any surplus Wildling icons). Read how to
resolve wildling attacks on page 22.
4. Resolve Westeros Cards: Now, in order of deck
number (starting with numeral I), resolve each revealed
Westeros Card.
To resolve a Westeros card, simply read the cards text and
implement its effects. Many cards are self-explanatory, but
some require a detailed understanding of their specified
effect. The resolution effects of those important Westeros
cards are found on the following pages.
The Game Round
Wildling Icon
There are three decks of Westeros cards, each marked
with a roman numeral. When revealing and later resolving
Westeros cards during the Westeros Phase, always start with
deck I, followed by deck II, and then deck III.
1. Event Title and Artwork
2. Deck Number: The number in the right-hand box
indicates which Westeros deck this card belongs to (also
indicated on the card back).
3. Text Effect: Describes how this card affects gameplay.
4. Wildling Icon: Some cards show a Wildling icon in the
upper right corner. During the Advance Wildlings Track step,
the Wildling Threat token is advanced one space for each of
these icons present on the drawn Westeros cards.
The Westeros Cards

A Game of Thrones
Westeros Card: Supply
Armies require enormous amounts of supplies to function
efficiently: food, water, steel, horses, clothing, etc. Without adequate
provisions, an army will quickly deteriorate.
When resolving the Supply Westeros card,
each House, in turn order, counts the number
of Supply icons printed in areas it controls, and
then moves its Supply token on the Supply track
to reflect that level of supply.
Each column on the Supply track has a resulting set of flags.
These flags illustrate the number of different armies, and the
maximum number of units in each such army, that a House may
field on the game board.
For example, a House with a supply of 3 may field four armies: one
army with a maximum of three units, and three smaller armies each
with a maximum of two units.
Reminder: An army is defined as two or more friendly units in
the same land or sea area. A single unit is not considered an army,
and has no supply consideration.
In the illustration above, Stark (with actual supply of two) is able
to field up to three armies, being two armies each containing two
units, and one army containing up to three units. Both Lannister and
Baratheon have more supply, and therefore can field proportionally
more (and larger) armies.
After a player adjusts supply, he must ensure the actual number
(and size) of his armies on the game board do not exceed his
supply limits. If his armies do exceed new supply limits, he must
immediately remove units from the game board until his army
number (and size) conforms to that allowed by his position on the
Supply track.
Other Supply Rules
A player is allowed to have fewer and/or smaller armies
than the limit provided by his position on the Supply track.
Though a Knight or a Siege Engine unit are stronger than
Footmen or Ship units, they only count as one unit for the
purpose of supply.
Though a player may gain or lose Supply icons on the game
board throughout one or more Action Phases, his armies
are reconciled only when the Supply track is adjusted (via a
Supply Westeros card, or other game effects).
A player is never allowed to take any action in the game
that would cause him to exceed his actual supply limit
as dictated by his position on the Supply track (such as
mustering, marching or retreating, all explained later).
Supply Icon
Supply Example
Lannister has recently lost control of Riverrun and
Seagard to Greyjoy (each of which contains a single Supply
icon). During a later Westeros Phase, a Supply card is
revealed. Due to the loss of these areas, Lannister must now
adjust his actual Supply from 5 to 3.
Before the Supply card is drawn, Lannister has four armies
of 4, 3, 2, and 2 units.
Lannister also controls several areas containing a single
unit, but as single units do not form an army, supply limits
have no effect on them.
As Lannisters supply drops to 3, he can no longer
adequately supply some of its armies. As indicated on the
Supply track, a supply of 3 allows Lannister to field four
armies with the sizes: 3, 2, 2, and 2. To reconcile with his new
supply level, Lannister destroys one of his Footmen at The
Twins and one of his Footmen at Harrenhal.
A Game of Thrones
Westeros Card: Mustering
The Mustering Westeros card represents the efforts of the
great Houses in calling their bannermen to action, in training
and outfitting warriors, assembling warships, and constructing
massive engines of war.
When resolving the Mustering Westeros card, each player,
in turn order, may recruit new units into each area he controls
that contains a Castle or Stronghold. Each Castle or Stronghold
provides mustering points which may be spent to recruit new
units in its area:
Strongholds each provide 2
points of mustering
Castles each provide 1 point of
mustering
The mustering cost of each unit type is as follows:
Footman: Costs 1 point of mustering
Knight: Costs 2 points of mustering (or 1
point if upgraded from a Footman)
Ship: Costs 1 point of mustering
Siege Engine: Costs 2 points of mustering (or
1 point if upgraded from a Footman)
A mustered unit is taken from its players unused units, and
placed directly into the area of the Castle or Stronghold that
provided the mustering point(s) to muster it.
A Footman unit located in a mustering area (i.e., an area
containing a Castle or Stronghold) may be upgraded to (i.e., replaced
with) a Knight or Siege Engine unit for a cost of 1 mustering point.
A player may never muster a unit that would create or
expand an army beyond his actual supply limit. In other words,
if mustering a new unit would cause a player to have more (or
larger) armies than allowed by his position on the Supply track,
that unit cannot be mustered.
If an area containing a Castle or Stronghold is unable to muster
or upgrade a unit (or its owner decides not to muster or upgrade in
this area) its mustering points are lost (i.e., they do not contribute to
a future mustering here).
Each player must resolve all his mustering (for all areas
containing his Castles and Strongholds) before the next player in
turn order can start his mustering.
Mustering Ship Units
Ship units, like other units, are mustered by an area containing
a Castle or Stronghold. Unlike other unit types, however, Ship units
may only be placed in a port connected to the mustering area or in an
adjacent sea area (see page 25 for more detail on ports).
Ship units cannot be mustered into sea areas that contain one
or more enemy ships. If a Castle or Stronghold area has no port or
eligible adjacent sea areas, no Ship units can be mustered there.
Remember that two or more Ship units in the same sea
area are considered an army, and must conform to a Houses
supply restrictions like any other army. (While it would be more
accurate to call multiple Ship units a fleet, the term army is used
for simplicity.)
Unlike Ship units, Footmen, Knight, and Siege Engine units may
never be mustered in ports or sea areas.
Mustering Example
A Mustering card is revealed during the Westeros Phase.
Lannister (with Supply of 3) is first player in the turn order and
now musters new units.
1. He uses one of the two mustering points provided in
Lannisport to place a Footman unit at Lannisport and the other
to place a Ship unit in the Golden Sound.
2. Turning his attention to Harrenhal, he uses its single
mustering point to upgrade one of his two Footmen units there
to a Knight (upgrading does not affect army size).
3. Since he already has an army of three Knights at Riverrun,
he uses one of his mustering points at Riverrun to place another
Ship in the Golden Sound (which is adjacent to Riverrun),
creating an army of two Ships. He cannot use the one remaining
mustering point at Riverrun since he has met his Supply limit.
4. Lannister also controls Stoney Sept, but since that area
contains neither a Castle or Stronghold, no mustering takes
place there.

A Game of Thrones
Westeros Card: Clash of Kings
From the invasion of the First Men to the reign of the Andal
kings; from the fiery conquest of the Targaryens to the rebellion of
Robert Baratheon, the continent of Westeros has known constant
military upheaval. Yet, the game of thrones is not always played
on the battlefield. Intrigue, betrayal, and assassinations have felled
many a contender, and so has lack of support from the minor houses
of Westeros. A House that dares set its eyes on the Iron Throne must
turn many wheels within wheels to achieve its ends.
The Clash of Kings Westeros card simulates the intrigue and
plotting quietly taking place behind the curtain of war, affecting it in
many subtle (and some not-so-subtle) ways.
To resolve Clash of Kings, first remove all Influence tokens
from the three Influence tracks on the game board. Players then
bid available power for position on the three tracks. The bidding
is resolved one track at a time, starting with the Iron Throne
track, followed by the Fiefdoms track, and ending with the Kings
Court track.
Bidding on the Influence Tracks
When bidding on each Influence track, players first hide all
their available power tokens behind their player screens. Then each
player secretly places any number of his available power tokens
into his hand, hiding them in a closed fist. Once all players have
made their selections, everyone simultaneously reveals their bid by
opening their hands.
The player with the highest bid places one of his Influence
tokens on the 1 position of the track being bid upon. The player
with the second highest bid places one of his Influence token on
the 2 position of the same track, the third highest player on the
3 position, etc.
The outcome of all ties in bidding is decided by the player
holding the Iron Throne token. This player places the Influence
tokens of tied players on the highest (i.e., left-most) available
positions on the track, in the order of his choice.
All power tokens bid by players, regardless of outcome, are
discarded to the Power Pool.
After all Influence tokens have been placed on the track
undergoing bidding, the player occupying the tracks 1 position
is awarded its Dominance token (Iron Throne, Valyrian Steel Blade,
or Messenger Raven token, see page 11 for more detail on
Dominance token abilities), then players proceed to bid on the next
Influence track.
After bidding for the Kings Court track is completed and the
Messenger Raven awarded, the Clash of Kings Westeros card has
been resolved and the game continues. All remaining Power tokens
are returned to the front of each players screen.
During a five-player game, a Clash of Kings card has been
drawn in this rounds Westeros Phase. Players have already
finished bidding on the Iron Throne track (with House Greyjoy
winning the first place and the Iron Throne Dominance token).
Bidding now proceeds to the Fiefdoms track. Each player
hides his available power behind his player screen and secretly
places a number of Power tokens in his hand, making a closed
fist. The bids are then revealed simultaneously, with the
following results:
Lannister: 4 Power
Baratheon: 3 Power
Stark: 3 Power
Tyrell: 2 Power
Greyjoy: 0 Power
Influence Track Bidding Example
Lannister claims the first spot on the fiefdoms track, placing his
Influence token on the 1 position.
Baratheon and Stark are tied for the second-highest bid.
Greyjoy (who currently controls the Iron Throne Dominance token)
decides that Baratheons Influence token will be placed on the 2
position and Stark on the 3 position.
Tyrell, being the fourth-highest bidder, places his influence
token on the 4 position, while Greyjoy, who bid the least, places
his token on the 5 position. The 6 position will remain unused
as this is a five-player game.
After all Influence tokens have been placed on the track, House
Lannister takes the Valyrian Steel Blade token as his reward for
claiming the first spot on the Fiefdoms track.
A Game of Thrones
The game board features three different Influence tracks:
The Iron Throne track, the Fiefdoms track, and the Kings Court
track. The player in the highest position on each track receives
a specific Dominance token: The Iron Throne, the Valyrian Steel
Blade, or the Messenger Raven. The effects of each Influence
track and its respective Dominance token are described below.
The Iron Throne Track
The order of Influence tokens on the Iron Throne Influence
track determines the turn order. When resolving anything in
turn order, always start with the player whose token is in the 1
position on the track, followed by the player whose token is in the
2 position, etc.
The player whose token is in position 1 of the Iron Throne
Influence track holds the Iron Throne token.
The Iron Throne Token
The player holding this token decides
the outcome of all ties that occur in
the game, with the exception of ties in
combat (which are resolved by a players
position on the Fiefdoms track) and ties in
determining the winner of the game.
Note: The Iron Throne token does not
change hands until bidding for the Iron
Throne track has been resolved and all
Influence tokens have been placed on that track. Thus, the player
controlling the Iron Throne token still breaks ties when bidding
on the Iron Throne track, even though he may lose the Iron
Throne token after the bidding is over.
The Fiefdoms Track
The player with a higher position (i.e., closer to 1) on the
Fiefdoms track wins ties in combat against a player in a lower
position (see Combat on page 17).
The player whose token is in position 1 of the Fiefdoms
Influence track holds the Valyrian Steel Blade token.
Remember, all ties outside of combat and determining
the winner of the game are decided by the holder of the Iron
Throne token, including ties in bidding for the Fiefdoms track.
The Valyrian Steel Blade Token
The Valyrian Steel Blade Token
The player holding the Valyrian Steel Blade token may, once
per game round, use the token in combat to grant himself a +1
Combat Strength bonus.
Whenever a player uses the Valyrian Steel Blade, he flips the
token over to its faded side, indicating it has been used this game
round. At the end of every Action Phase (and thus the end of that
round), the holder of the Valyrian Steel Blade flips the token back
to its fully colored side, indicating it is available to be used again
in the next game round.
The Kings Court Track
A Houses position on the Kings Court track determines the
number of Special Order tokens available to that House during
the Planning Phase. The higher a Houses position (i.e., closer to
1) on the Kings Court track, the greater the number of Special
Order tokens available to that House.
The player whose token is in position 1 of the Kings Court
Influence track holds the Messenger Raven token.
The number of special orders provided by the Kings Court
track is indicated by the number of stars printed by each
position on the track (some lower positions award no special
orders). More information on special orders can be found under
The Special Orders on page 22.
In three and four player games, the Kings Court overlay
token is placed over the Kings Court track to alter the number of
special orders awarded by each position.
The Messenger Raven Token
The player holding the Messenger
Raven token may perform one of the
following actions at the end of every
Assign Orders step of the Planning phase:
Replace an Order Token: The
holder may swap one of his Order tokens
on the game board for one of his unused
Order tokens.
Look in the Wildling Deck: The holder looks at the top
card of the Wildling deck. After looking, he may choose to
return the card to the top of the Wildling deck, or place the
card at the bottom of the Wildling deck. He may share the
information found on the card with other players (or even lie),
but may not show the card.
Whenever a player uses the Messenger Raven, he flips the
Messenger Raven token over to its faded side, indicating it
has been used. At the end of every Action Phase, the holder of
the Messenger Raven flips the token back to its fully colored
side, indicating it is available to be used again during the
next game round.
The Influence Tracks and Dominance Tokens
The Messenger Raven
Token
The Iron Throne
Token
A Game of Thrones
The Planning Phase
During this phase, players secretly issue orders to areas on the
game board.
The Planning Phase consists of the following steps:
1. Assign Orders
2. Reveal Orders
3. Use Messenger Raven
1. Assign Orders
During this step, each player must place exactly one Order token
facedown (i.e., secretly, his house insignia facing up) on each area
he controls that contains at least one of his units (Footman, Knight,
Ship, or Siege Engine). All players place their orders simultaneously.
An area cannot be assigned more than one Order token.
While players may not reveal placed orders to other players,
they are free to plead, cajole, and/or suggest strategies to each
other during this step.
There are five different types of Order tokens:
March Orders
Defense Orders
Support Orders
Raid Orders
Consolidate Power Orders
The Order tokens depicted above are regular Order tokens. Each
player also has five Special Order tokens  stronger variants of
each order type, marked by a star. Special orders are described in
detail on page 22.
Special Order Token
(indicated by a Star)
Order Token
A player may use any of his 10 regular Order tokens during
the Planning Phase, but may only use a number of Special Order
tokens equal to the number of stars printed next to his position on
the Kings Court Influence track.
For example (in a six-player game), the House in position 1 of the
Kings Court Influence Track may use up to 3 special orders (as indicated
by the three stars on the 1 position) during the Planning Phase. The
House in 4th position, however, may use only one special order, while the
House in 5th position may use no special orders at all.
The game effects of each regular order type is described in detail
in the Order Token Summary on page 13 (and also on each
player screen).
After all players have completed placing their orders, proceed to
the Reveal Orders step. Be sure that every area containing at least one
unit has been assigned an Order token before proceeding. If not, then one
or more players have not placed all required Order tokens.
Not Enough Order Tokens?
In very rare circumstances, a player will have fewer eligible
Order tokens than he needs (i.e., he is unable to assign an order
to each area containing one or more of his units). In this case, all
players must take the Assign Orders step in turn order (rather than
simultaneously). The first player places all of his orders (facedown
as normal) on the game board, followed by the next player in turn
order, etc. The player(s) with insufficient number of eligible Order
tokens must place all his eligible Order tokens during his turn,
but as an exception to the normal rules, is allowed to leave areas
(of his choice) without an order. A player may never, under any
circumstance, place more Special Order tokens than allowed by his
position on the Kings Court Influence track.
2. Reveal Orders
All orders assigned to the game board are now simultaneously
revealed. Simply flip all orders faceup, revealing their order types.
They will later be resolved during the Action Phase.
3. Use Messenger Raven
As described in the sidebar on page 11, the player holding the
Messenger Raven token may perform one of the following actions:
 Replace an Order Token: Swap one of his Order tokens on
the game board for one of his unused Order tokens.
 Look at the Top Wildling Card: He looks at the top card of
the Wildling deck. After looking, he may choose to return the card
facedown to the top of the Wildling deck, or place the card facedown
at the bottom of the Wildling deck. He may willingly share
the information found on the card with other players, but may not
show the card to others.
If desired, the holder of the Messenger Raven may choose not
use either of these abilities during this step.
Whenever a player uses the Messenger Raven, he flips the
Messenger Raven token over to its faded side, indicating it has
been used. At the end of every Action Phase, the holder of the
Messenger Raven flips the token back to its fully colored side,
indicating it is available to be used again during the next game
round.
After resolving this step, the Planning Phase is now over, and play
proceeds to the Action Phase.
A Game of Thrones
The Raid Order
Raid Orders represent aggressive incursions and pillaging of
enemy lands. They aim to disrupt enemy plans and drain him of
precious resources.
A Raid Order is resolved during the first step of the Action
Phase by expending itself to remove one adjacent enemy Support,
Consolidate Power, or Raid Order. Detailed rules for resolving Raid
Order tokens are found on page 14.
Each player has two normal Raid Orders and one Special
Raid Order.
The March Order
March Orders represent the movement of troops and ships
across the lands and seas of Westeros. Only by assigning March
Orders to units on the game board, can players take control of
new areas and engage opponents in combat.
March Orders are resolved during the second step of the Action
Phase. When resolved, all units in the Order tokens assigned area
may march (i.e., move) to one or more adjacent areas. If marching
units enter an area containing one or more enemy units, a combat
ensues (only one combat, however, may be initiated for each
March Order). Detailed rules for resolving March Orders during
the Action Phase are found on page 15. Rules for Combat are
found on page 17.
Each player has two normal March Orders, one with a -1 Combat
Strength modifier, another with a +0 Combat Strength modifier, as
well as one Special March Order.
The Defense Order
Defense Orders represent the preparation of strong defensive
positions. They grant a Combat Strength bonus to the defender of the
assigned area (the bonus is indicated by the number printed on the
Order token). Detailed rules for Combat are found on page 17.
Unless removed during the Action Phase (by losing a combat in
the assigned area, for example), a Defense Order will contribute its
defensive bonus against any number of attacks against its assigned
area during the same game round.
Each player has two normal Defense Orders, both providing a
+1 Combat Strength modifier, as well as one Special Defense Order.
The Support Order
Support Orders represent both logistical and martial assistance
to forces engaged in nearby battle. Not only may support be
granted to a players own combat needs, but to that of another
player. This makes the Support Order the fulcrum of negotiation
and intrigue in A Game of Thrones: The Board Game.
During the Declare Support step of combat, supporting units
adjacent to the embattled area may add their combat strength to
one of the two participants in the adjacent combat. Detailed rules
for using Support Orders during combat are found on page 17.
Each player has two normal Support Orders, as well as one
Special Support Order.
The Consolidate Power Order
Consolidate Power Orders represent the garnering of local favor,
the collection of tax income, and the harvesting of resources from
areas under a players control. They are the most direct way for
players to gain Power tokens from the Power Pool.
Consolidate Power Orders are resolved during the third step of
the Action Phase. When resolved, the Order token is removed from
the game board in exchange for gaining one Power token from the
Power Pool, plus one Power token for each Power icon printed on
the assigned area. Detailed rules for resolving Consolidate Power
Orders are found on page 16.
Consolidate Power Orders placed on sea areas have no effect,
but may still be placed.
Each player has two normal Consolidate Power Orders and one
Special Consolidate Power Order.
Order Token Summary
A Game of Thrones
The Action Phase
During the Action Phase, players resolve all orders that were
assigned to the game board during the Planning Phase. The Action
Phase is resolved by performing the following steps:
1. Resolve Raid Orders
2. Resolve March Orders (and resulting combat)
3. Resolve Consolidate Power Orders
4. Clean Up
1. Resolve Raid Orders
In turn order, each player resolves one of his Raid Orders on the
game board. If a player has no such orders remaining, he simply
skips any further action during this step.
Keep cycling through the turn order, with each player resolving
one of his Raid Orders, until no Raid Orders remain on the game
board. Play then proceeds to the Resolve March Orders step.
When resolving a Raid Order, a player simply chooses one
enemy Support, Raid, or Consolidate Power Order adjacent to the
Raid Order. The chosen order and the resolved Raid Order are both
removed from the game board.
By raiding enemy orders, players are effectively canceling
opponents orders, leaving the raided areas without Order tokens.
If a Raid Order is used to remove an opponents Consolidate
Power Order token, the raiding player is said to be pillaging his
opponent. After resolving the Raid Order, the pillaging player
receives one Power token from the Power Pool and the opponent
discards one of his available power tokens to the Power Pool, if
able. The pillaging player always gains one token from the Power
Pool, even if the opponent has none available to lose.
A Raid Order placed on a land area can never raid an adjacent
sea area. A Raid Order placed on a sea area, however, may raid
either an adjacent land or sea area.
Raid Orders can remove adjacent Special Order tokens, as long
as they match the legal type (i.e., Support, Raid, or Consolidate
Power tokens).
Other Rules for Raid Orders
If there are no eligible adjacent enemy Orders tokens when
resolved, the Raid Order is removed from the game board
with no effect.
When resolving a Raid Order, the player may choose
for the order to have no effect (simply removing it from
the game board), even if there are one or more eligible
adjacent enemy orders.
See the Example of Raid Order Resolution sidebar for a
comprehensive example of how to resolve Raid Orders.
There are five Raid Orders on the board. Lannister has Raid
Orders at The Reach and in the Sunset Sea, Greyjoy has a Raid
Order in the West Summer Sea, Tyrell has a Raid Order at the
Dornish Marches, while Baratheon has a Special Raid Order at
Stoney Sept.
The turn order (decided by the Iron Throne track) is: Greyjoy,
Stark, Lannister, Baratheon, and Tyrell.
The Resolve Raid Orders step is completed as follows:
1. Greyjoy resolves his Raid Order first. He decides to raid Tyrells
Consolidate Power Order at Highgarden. Greyjoy removes his
Raid Order as well as Tyrells Consolidate Power Order token from
Highgarden. Since raiding a Consolidate Power token is considered
pillaging, Greyjoy collects one Power token from the Power Pool,
while Tyrell discards one Power token to the Power Pool.
2. Stark has no Raid Orders, so Lannister goes next. Lannister
has two Raid Orders on the game board. He chooses to raid
the Tyrell Raid Order in the Dornish Marches from The Reach.
Lannister removes his Raid Order at The Reach as well as the
Tyrell Raid Order token in the Dornish Marches.
3. Baratheon uses his Special Raid Order at Stoney Sept to
remove the Lannister Defense Order at Lannisport. He removes
both tokens. (Removing a Defense Order is the unique ability of
a Special Raid Order, see The Special Orders on page 22.)
4. Because his only Raid Order was removed by the first
Lannister Raid, Tyrell has no Raid Orders. Play goes back to the
top of the turn order.
5. Since Lannisters remaining Raid Order in the Sunset Sea is
not adjacent to any enemy Support, Consolidate Power, or Raid
Orders, it is removed from the game board with no effect.
Example of Raid Order
Resolution
A Game of Thrones
2. Resolve March Orders
In turn order, each player resolves one of his March Orders
on the game board. If a player has no such orders remaining, he
simply skips any further action during this step.
Keep cycling through the turn order, with each player resolving
one March Order at a time, until no March Orders remain on the
game board. Play then proceeds to the Resolve Consolidate Power
Orders step.
Resolving March Orders is perhaps the most important
aspect of A Game of Thrones: The Board Game. It is during this
step that players move units on the board, engage in combat
against their opponents, and gain crucial territory needed to
fulfill their ambitions.
When resolving a March Order, the following rules apply:
A player may move all, some, or none of his units from the
area assigned the March Order.
Units may move together or separately into several
adjacent areas, and/or remain in the area assigned the
March Order.
A player may only move units into adjacent areas (unless
using ship transport, see Ship Transport on page 23).
Footmen, Knights, and Siege Engine units may never move
into sea areas or ports. Ship units may move into friendly
connected port areas or into adjacent sea areas, but may
never move into a land area.
For each March Order, a player may move units into only
one area containing units of another House. In other
words, while the marching player may split his units and
move them into several adjacent areas, only one of those
areas may contain units from another house
When a player moves one or more units into an area
containing units from another house, he starts a combat
as the attacker. See rules for combat on page 17.
Before resolving combat, all other non-combat
movement from the area assigned the March Order
must be completed.
The number printed on each March Order token signifies
the Combat Strength modifier provided to the attacking
player when a combat is initiated with that March Order.
If a player vacates (i.e., leaves no unit behind in) an
area, he loses control of that area unless he establishes
control by placing a Power token from his available
power on the vacated area. Rules for controlling areas and
establishing control are found on page 24.
See the March Order Example sidebar for an example of
resolving a March Order.
Advanced Strategy Tip: A player can stagger movement by
placing several March Orders in adjacent areas. In this fashion,
a unit is able to move more than one area in a turn. This is
accomplished by marching units into an area containing another
friendly March Order, and later (when resolving that second
March Order) moving that areas units into a new area (potentially
containing the third friendly March Order, which would allow
the units to move again when that last March Order is later
resolved). This can be a difficult trick to accomplish, however, since
a successful enemy attack could remove one of the March Orders
in this chain.
March Order Example
Lannister has assigned a March Order to the Lannisport area
which contains three Footman units.
When resolving the March Order, Lannister first moves a
Footman into Stoney Sept, and then moves a Footman into the
Searoad Marches (which already contains a Lannister Footman,
thus forming an army of two). The last Footman unit remains in
Lannisport.
The Lannister player has now resolved this March Order and
removes the token (no Combat was initiated).
A Game of Thrones
3. Resolve Consolidate Power Orders
In turn order, each player resolves one of his Consolidate
Power Orders on the game board. If a player has no such orders
remaining, he simply skips any further action during this step.
Keep cycling through the turn order, with each
player resolving one of his Consolidate Power
Orders until none remain on the game board.
Play then proceeds to the Clean Up step.
When a player resolves a Consolidate Power
Order, he removes the Consolidate Power token
to gain one Power token from the Power Pool, plus one additional
Power token for each Power icon printed on the area in which the
Consolidate Power Order was assigned.
See the Consolidate Power Order Example sidebar for an
example of resolving a Consolidate Power Order.
4. Clean Up
All remaining Support and Defense Orders are now removed
from the game board and all routed units are stood to their
upright position (see Retreats and Routing on page 21 for more
information on routed units). The Messenger Raven and the Valyrian
Steel Blade tokens are both flipped to their available (non-faded)
side.
The Action Phase is now over. If this was the end of game round 10,
the game is over and a winner is determined. Otherwise play proceeds
to the next game round starting with a new Westeros Phase.
Removing/Resolving Orders
Whether an Order token is resolved normally or removed from
the game board by other means, it is simply returned to its Houses
available orders, ready for use during the next Planning Phase.
Winning the Game
A Game of Thrones: The Board Game ends in one of two ways:
The game reaches the end of the 10th game round.
Immediately after a player controls his seventh area
containing a Castle or Stronghold.
Each player must, at all times, record the number of areas he
controls containing a Castle and/or Strongholds on the Victory
track located on the game board.
At the end of the 10th game round, the player with the highest
position on the Victory track (i.e., controls the most areas with
a Castle or Stronghold) wins the game. If two (or more) players
are tied for the highest position, the tied player who holds the
greater number of Strongholds win. If there is still a tie, the tied
player with the higher position on the Supply Track wins. If there
is still a tie, the tied player with the most available power wins. In
the extremely rare case there is still a tie, the tied player with the
higher position on the Iron Throne track wins.
If a House, at any time, reaches the seventh position on the
Victory Track (i.e., gains his seventh area containing a Castle or
Stronghold) the game immediately ends and that player is the
winner.
Power Icon
Consolidate Power Order
Example
A lone Baratheon Footman remains on Dragonstone. During
the Assign Orders step, Baratheon chooses to assign Dragonstone
a Consolidate Power order. Later, during the Action phase,
Baratheon resolves the order and gains two Power tokens: One
Power token from the order itself, and one additional Power token
for the Power icon printed in the Dragonstone area. He takes
the two Power tokens from the Power Pool and adds them to his
available power.
A Game of Thrones
A player who controls such an adjacent Support order may now
grant (or refuse to grant) his supporting Combat Strength to
either the attacker or the defender.
Supporting Combat Strength means the combined Combat
Strength of all units in the supporting area.
Support may be given to any adjacent combat, whether a
supporting players own forces are in the combat, or the combat is
between two other players.
If there are multiple Support Orders adjacent to the embattled
area, support must be declared (or refused) in turn order.
If the attacking or defending player has friendly Support Orders
in adjacent areas, he may support himself in the combat (and
usually will do so).
Combat
Whenever a player marches one or more of his units into an
area containing units from another House, combat ensues.
Combat is resolved by comparing the total Combat Strength of
the battling sides. The victor is the player who gathers the highest
Combat Strength.
The following elements can contribute to Combat Strength:
Units in the combat
Supporting units
Defense Order (defender only)
March Order (attacker only)
The Valyrian Steel Blade token
House cards
Garrison token (defender only)
The player resolving the March Order is considered the attacker
(and his units are attacking) while the opponent occupying the
contested area is the defender (and his units are defending). Any
supporting units (via a Support Order from an adjacent area) are
considered supporting (i.e., they are not considered attacking or
defending).
Combat is resolved by performing the following steps:
1. Call for Support
2. Calculate Initial Combat Strength
3. Choose and Reveal House Cards
4. Use Valyrian Steel Blade
5. Calculate Final Combat Strength
6. Combat Resolution
1. Call for Support
During the first step of combat, both attacker and defender may
plead for support from all areas adjacent to the embattled area that
contain a Support Order.
Unit Combat Strengths
Each unit type contributes a specific amount of Combat
Strength to combat:
Footman: Adds 1 Combat Strength.
Knight: Adds 2 Combat Strength.
Ship: Adds 1 Combat Strength.
Siege Engine: Adds 4 Combat Strength
when attacking (or supporting an attack
against) an area containing a Castle or
Stronghold. Otherwise it adds 0 Combat
Strength.
A Game of Thrones
Other Rules for Support Orders:
When a player grants support, his Support Order token is not
removed after the combat. A Support Order may support any
number of adjacent combats in the same game round.
A Support Order gives no defensive benefit to attacks against
its own area (the units in its area will defend normally).
Attacking or defending players may refuse support.
Ship units may support adjacent combat in a sea area or a
land area. Footmen, Knights, or Siege Engine units, however,
may never provide support to combat in a sea area.
Supporting Siege Engine units only provide supporting
Combat Strength when supporting the attacker in an
embattled area containing either a Castle or Stronghold.
A supporting player must contribute an areas full
supporting Combat Strength, or none at all.
A player may never support an opponent in combat against
his own units.
Reminder: Support can be granted only from an area containing
a Support Order that is adjacent to the embattled area. Do not
confuse the embattled area with the area the attacking March Order
was assigned to (and from which the attackers marched).
See the Support Example sidebar for a comprehensive example
of support in combat.
After all Support Orders adjacent to the embattled area have
granted (or refused) support, proceed to the next Combat step.
2. Calculate Initial Combat Strength
Both sides now tally and announce their Combat Strength.
This number is referred to as their Initial Combat Strength. It
includes all Combat Strength bestowed from the following sources:
Attacking/defending units
Defense order bonus (for the defender only)
March order bonus/penalty (for the attacker only)
Supporting units and Special Support Order bonuses
Garrison token (see page 26)
Both players clearly announce their initial Combat Strength
after which the combat proceeds to the Choose and Reveal House
Cards step.
Support Example
Tyrell is marching an army of two Knights from The Reach
into Blackwater with a +1 March Order. Blackwater contains
one Lannister Footman and a Lannister -1 March Order.
As the first step of combat, players now call for support.
There are three Support orders in areas adjacent to
Blackwater: Kings Landing (Tyrell, one Knight), Stoney Sept
(Lannister, one Footman and one Knight), and Harrenhal
(Baratheon, one Knight).
Lannister announces he is supporting himself from
Stoney Sept (3 Combat Strength). Baratheon then
announces his support to Lannister from Harrenhal (2
Combat Strength). Finally, Tyrell announces he is supporting
himself from Kings Landing (2 Combat Strength).
At this point in the battle Tyrell has 7 combat strength
(4 for the attacking Knights, 2 for the support from Kings
Landing, and 1 from the +1 March Order). Lannister has 6
combat strength (1 for his defending Footman and 5 from the
supporting units in Stoney Sept and Harrenhal).
A Game of Thrones
3. Choose and Reveal House Cards
Both attacker and defender now secretly select one House card
from their hands of House cards. When both players are ready, the
two cards are simultaneously revealed and any text abilities of the
cards are resolved.
Playing a House card during combat is mandatory. Both attacker
and defender must play a card.
Combat then proceeds to step 4 Use Valyrian Steel Blade.
The House Cards
Each player begins the game with seven unique House cards.
These represent characters lending their abilities and strength to
combat (for a visual breakdown of a House card, see the House
Card Breakdown diagram above).
After players reveal House cards during a combat, the text
abilities of the two House cards are immediately resolved. Some
text abilities specify that they are implemented later during the
same combat (such as at the end of the combat) but unless stated
otherwise, implement the effect immediately.
There are instances when the exact order of House card
resolution is important. Should a timing conflict occur, follow this
order of operations:
1. Any Ignore or Cancel text abilities are first resolved in
the player order of the Iron Throne track.
A Greyjoy House Card
2. Other conflicting text abilities are then resolved in the player
order of the Iron Throne track.
3. After the outcome of combat is determined, any win/lose
this combat... text abilities are resolved in the player order of
the Iron Throne track.
The text ability of the first card is implemented completely
before that of the second card.
After a combat is resolved, the two played House cards are placed
face-up in their respective players discard pile. While a House card is
in a players discard pile, it is not available for use in combat.
At the end of a combat, if a player used his last (i.e., seventh)
House card, he then returns the other six House cards currently
in his discard pile to his hand. The last played card remains in the
discard pile.
The Combat Icons
Some cards do not have a text ability, instead they provide their
player with one or more combat icons. There are two combat icons
in A Game of Thrones: The Board Game: The Sword icon and the
Fortification icon.
The Sword Icon: During the Combat
Resolution step, the player who won the
combat (i.e., the victor) counts the number
of Sword icons on his House card. For each
Sword icon, an enemy unit in the embattled area must be destroyed
(see Casualties on page 20).
The Fortification Icon: For each
Fortification icon on the House card of the
defeated player, one of the victors Sword
icons is ignored.
Note: All House cards, whether available or used (i.e.,
discarded), are public knowledge. As such, a players discard pile
or hand may be examined by others players at any time except
during Step 3 of combat.
1. Leader Name and Artwork: The artwork and name
identifying a personality from A Song of Ice and Fire.
2. Combat Strength: The Combat Strength of a revealed
House card is added to its players Combat Strength.
3. Text Ability: The House cards special ability that may
affect the combat or some other aspect of the game.
4. Combat Icons: Cards without text abilities instead
provide one or more sword and/or fortification icons.
House Card Breakdown
A Game of Thrones
4. Use Valyrian Steel Blade
If either the attacker or the defender holds the Valyrian Steel
Blade token, that player now has the option of using its ability to
provide +1 to his total Combat Strength. If used, flip the token to its
faded side, as a reminder that it cannot be used again this round.
5. Calculate Final Combat Strength
Both sides now combine their initial Combat Strength with
any modifiers accumulated by playing House cards and using the
Valyrian Steel Blade token. This final value is referred to as a players
Final Combat Strength.
Below is a summary of what could contribute to each players
final Combat Strength:
Initial Combat Strength
The Combat Strength and applicable text abilities of the
chosen House card
The Valyrian Steel Blades +1 Combat Strength (if available
and used)
Some House card text abilities may cause a players initial
Combat Strength to be recalculated. For example, if the text of a
revealed House card destroys an opponents Footman unit, the initial
Combat Strength of that opponent is reduced by 1 during this step.
6. Combat Resolution
The combat is concluded by performing the following steps:
1. Determine Victor
2. Casualties
3. Retreats and Routing
4. Combat Clean Up
1. Determine Victor
The player with the highest final Combat Strength wins the combat
and his opponent is defeated. If the final Combat Strength results are
tied, the player with the higher position (i.e., closer to the 1 position)
on the Fiefdoms track wins the combat.
2. Casualties
Only the defeated player takes casualties in combat. Casualties
are determined as follows:
1. Victors Sword Icon: Count the number of Swords icons
on the victors House card.
2. Defeated Players Fortification Icons: Count the number
of Fortification icons on the defeated players House card.
Tyrell marches two units from Kings Landing into the
Kingswood. Since there are two Lannister footmen units in the
Kingswood, combat ensues.
Since there are no adjacent Support Orders, Lannisters
initial combat strength is 2 (two Footmen) and Tyrells is 3 (one
Footman, one Knight). Tyrells March Order was +0, giving him
neither a Combat Strength bonus or penalty.
Both players now secretly choose and reveal a House card
from their hands. Lannister reveals Ser Jaime Lannister with
a strength of 2 and one sword icon. Tyrell reveals Alester
Florent with a strength of 1 and one fortification icon.
Neither Lannister or Tyrell have the Valyrian Steel Blade, so
no combat strength is received from this.
Combat Resolution Example
The combatants are tied with a final combat strength of 4.
However, Lannister is higher than Tyrell on the Fiefdoms track.
Since a Houses position on the Fiefdoms track breaks ties in
combat, Lannister is the victor.
Tyrell, having lost the combat, could potentially suffer
casualties. However, Lannisters single sword icon (from Ser
Jaime Lannister) is offset by Tyrells single fortification icon (from
Alester Florent), so Tyrell suffer no casualties in this combat.
Tyrell must now retreat. Being the attacker, he must retreat back
to the area he marched from, and so retreats his units to Kings
Landing, laying them on their side to indicate they are routed.
A Game of Thrones
3. Defeated Player Suffers Casualties: The defeated
player must destroy one unit in the embattled area for each
Sword icon of the victorious player minus the number of
Fortification icons of the defeated player (if the result is zero
or less, the defender takes no casualties).
When a player suffers casualties, he decides which of his units
are removed (unless stated otherwise by the text ability of a played
House card). Remember that supporting units can never be taken
as casualties in combat.
Note: Each casualty suffered destroys a single unit, regardless
of Combat Strength. In other words, removing a Knight unit as a
casualty still counts as only one casualty even though its Combat
Strength is 2. For this reason, it is generally best to remove
Footmen units as casualties, if able.
3. Retreats and Routing
After suffering casualties, the losing army must retreat from
the embattled area (supporting units do not retreat.)
If the attacker lost the combat, his surviving units must retreat
back to the area from which they marched.
If the defender lost the combat, his surviving units must retreat
using the following rules:
The retreating units must retreat to one empty adjacent
area (i.e., one containing no enemy units or enemy Power
tokens) or to a friendly area (i.e., one containing friendly
units, and/or a friendly Power token).
The retreating units must retreat to the same area.
The retreating units may never retreat to the area the
attacking units marched from, even if it is empty.
A player may not retreat his defending units to an area
containing friendly units if this would cause him to
exceed his Supply limit. If a players only option is to
retreat to such an area, he must first destroy as many
retreating units as necessary to be compliant with his
Supply limit after retreating to the area. After taking such
losses, he may retreat the remaining units.
If there is no legal area in which to retreat, all retreating
units are destroyed.
Footmen or Knight units may not retreat to a sea area or a
port. Ship units may never retreat to a land area.
After retreating, all retreated units are placed on their sides to
signify they are now routed. Routed units provide no Combat
Strength, but still count towards a players supply limit. If a routed
unit is forced to retreat, it is instead destroyed. Routed units may
never be chosen as casualties in combat and may not move, even if
a March Order token is resolved in their new area.
Other Retreat Rules
A player is allowed to use ship transport to retreat his
units (see page 23 for ship transport rules).
Siege Engine units cannot retreat. If a Siege Engine unit is
forced to retreat, it is instead destroyed.
4. Combat Clean Up
After combat is completed, remove the attacking players March
Order token from the game board.
If the combat was won by the attacker, remove any Order token the
defender had assigned to the embattled area (if one remains) as well
as any Power token in the area (which would exist if the defending
player had previously established control there, see page 24).
If the combat was won by the defender, the defending players
Power and Order tokens (if any) in the area are unaffected.
Both played House cards are discarded to their respective players
discard piles, and the Resolve March Orders step of the Action Phase
now continues.
Retreating and
Routing Example
Baratheon has just attacked and defeated Tyrell in the
Kingswood. Tyrell has taken his casualties and must retreat.
1. Tyrell chooses to retreat his surviving Knight unit to Storms
End (which contains another Tyrell Footman). The retreating
Knight unit is placed on its side to indicate it is routed.
2. Later that same game round, House Baratheon attacks
Storms End with two Knights from The Boneway. In this
combat, the Tyrell player will have an initial Combat Strength
of 1 (for the Footman) as the routed Knight unit provides no
Combat Strength. If House Tyrell loses the battle, his routed
Knight will automatically be destroyed since a routed unit
may not retreat.
A Game of Thrones
Other Rules
The Special Orders
In addition to 10 normal Order tokens, each House also has five
Special Order tokens. A player may use any of his 10 normal Order
tokens during the Planning Phase, but may use only as many
Special Order tokens as he has stars on his Kings Court Influence
track position.
For example, in a five or six-player game, the player on the
highest position on the Kings Court track may use up to three
Special Order tokens per game round, while the player in fourth
position may only use a single Special orders, etc.
The capabilities of the Special Orders are described here:
Defense +2: Gives the defending player in its area
+2 Combat Strength.
March +1: Gives +1 Combat Strength to the
attacker when combat is initiated by this Special
March Order.
Support +1: The supporting Combat Strength from
this area is +1.
Raid: This token can be used as a normal Raid
Order, or it can instead be resolved to remove any
one adjacent Defense Order (remove both tokens).
Consolidate Power: This token can be used as a
normal Consolidate Power Order token, or can be
used to initiate mustering in its area following the
rules for mustering described on page 9. Only
the area that was assigned the Special Consolidate
Power Order is mustered. If theres no Castle or
Stronghold in the assigned area, no mustering can
take place.
While special orders are purely better than their regular
counterparts, they have an additional subtle advantage: Having
access to three instances of any order type (rather than two), can
be of tremendous benefit to many strategies (such as launching a
major offensive, quickly accumulating power, etc).
WildLing Attacks
In the icy north, an army of barbaric wildlings gather to
descend upon the continent of Westeros. The ancient order of the
Nights Watch protects the massive Wall that defends against these
(and even more insidious) dangers. Yet the strength of the Nights
Watch will fail without the support of the great Houses.
In A Game of Thrones: the Board Game there are two events
during the Westeros Phase which cause the wildlings to attack.
They are:
The Wildling Threat token reaches 12 on the Wildling track
A Wildling Attack Westeros card is drawn and resolved
The Wildling Threat
In all three Westeros decks (I, II, and III), some cards are marked
with a Wildling icon. For each such Westeros card, the Wildling
Threat token is advanced one space on the Wildlings track (in this
way, its possible for the Wildling Threat token to advance up to
three times during a single Westeros Phase).
A wildling attack is resolved over the following steps:
1. Determine Wildling Strength: Check the current
position of the Wildling Threat token. The number printed
on its position on the Wildlings track is the strength of the
wildling attack.
2. Bid Power: Each player hides his available power behind
his player screen, and then secretly bids a number of Power
tokens (from his available power) in a closed fist.
3. Calculate Nights Watch Strength: Once all players
have made their secret bid, bids are simultaneously revealed.
Add together the total power bid by all players to determine
the strength of the Nights Watch.
4. Determine Outcome: If the strength of the Nights
Watch equals or exceeds the wildling strength, the wildling
attack has been defeated.
Wildling Icon
A Game of Thrones
If the wildling strength exceeds the strength of the Nights
Watch, the wildlings are victorious. Players now resolve
the Consequences of a Wildling Attack as described in the
section below.
5. Adjust Wildlings Track: If the Nights Watch are
victorious, immediately reset the Wildling Threat token to 0 on
the Wildlings track. If the wildlings are victorious, however, the
Wildling Threat token is only moved back two positions (to a
minimum of 0).
6. Discard Power: All Power tokens bid by players,
regardless of victory or defeat, are discarded to the Power Pool.
Consequences of a Wildling Attack
After the outcome of a wildling attack has been determined
(during step 4 above), players face the ramifications of success or
failure, as follows:
1. Reveal Wildling Card: Draw
the top card of the Wildling deck
to determine the reward or penalty
players will receive.
2. Resolve Wildling Card:
If the Nights Watch successfully
defeated the wildlings, the player
who bid the highest amount of
Power receives the reward indicated
under Nights Watch Victory on the
Wildling card.
If the wildlings are victorious, the
player who bid the least amount of
Power suffers a severe penalty while the other players suffer a
lesser penalty. Both the severe and lesser penalties are described
on the Wildling card under Wildling Victory.
3. Bury Wildling Card: Place the used Wildling card
facedown on the bottom of the Wildling deck.
As elsewhere in A Game of Thrones: The Board Game, the outcome
of ties in bidding are decided by the holder of the Iron Throne
token. For example, if the lowest bid is tied between two players, the
holder of the Iron Throne token decides which of these two players is the
lowest bidder.
The wildling attack is now over and the game proceeds.
Note: In rare circumstances, its possible for the wildlings
to attack twice during one Westeros Phase. This would occur if
enough Wildling icons were drawn to make the Wildling token
reach the 12 position on the Wildling track, and the Westeros
card Wildlings Attack was revealed.
Ship Transport
The use of ships to transport land-based units is a very important
aspect of A Game of Thrones: The Board Game. It allows Knights,
Footmen, and Siege Engines to take advantage of the seas to travel
much faster than they would be able on foot.
Any two land areas are considered adjacent for the purposes of
marching and retreating when they are connected by consecutive
sea areas (or a single sea area) each containing one or more
friendly Ship units. In other words, Ship units in consecutively
adjacent sea areas form a direct bridge for Knights, Footmen, and
Siege Engines to move directly from a coastal area to another coastal
area in one move.
There is no limit to the number of times a player can use the
same Ship unit(s) for ship transport in any given round. The same
Ship unit(s) may even be used multiple times within the same
March Order, transporting units from the area assigned a March
Order to different destinations. However, a player may never use
ships of another House as transports, even if given permission by
that House.
Other Rules for Ship Transport
Ship units can facilitate ship transport regardless of the
type of Order token currently assigned to their sea area.
A routed Ship may be used for transport.
Footmen, Knight, and Siege Engine units may, via ship
transport, march into an enemy area and start combat
there (remember, only one combat can be started for each
March Order).
Ship units cannot move using ship transport.
While land areas connected by ship transport are
considered adjacent for purposes of marching and
retreating, they are not considered adjacent for any other
purpose (including supporting and raiding).
Example of Ship Transport
Tyrell has one Ship in the Redwyne Straights, one Ship in
the West Summer Sea, and one Ship in the East Summer Sea.
As these sea areas are consecutively adjacent, any Tyrell unit in
Highgarden can, with a single March Order, move directly to
Sunspear (or any other coastal area adjacent to the ships).
A Game of Thrones
Controlling Areas
A House is said to control a land area when it has at least one
Footman, Knight, or Siege Engine in the area, or has previously
established control in that area by placing a Power token there
(see below).
Establishing Control of an Area
If a player vacates a land area with all of his units, he stands
to lose any benefit gained from controlling that area unless he
chooses to establish control.
When a House vacates a land area (i.e., all its units leave during
a March Order) the House may elect to establish control by placing
a Power token from its available power in the vacated area (a
House can never establish control over a sea area). Once placed
on the game board, this Power token represents the support of
local nobles as well as investments in guards, tax collectors, and
bureaucrats loyal to the controlling House.
If friendly units enter the area again, the Power token remains
there, unaffected (and continues to establish control if the area is
vacated once more).
If a player leaves an area vacant before initiating a combat, he
must decide whether or not to establish control of the vacated area
before the combat begins.
A Power token on the game board is returned to the Power Pool
only after an opponent takes control of its area. Marching into an
area containing only an opponents Power token (i.e., no enemy
units are present) does not result in combat, and the Power token
is simply discarded to the Power Pool.
Power tokens do not aid the defender in combat, nor do
they count as Power icons printed on the game board (for the
purposes of Consolidate Power tokens or the Game of Thrones
Westeros card).
Only one Power token can be in an area at any one time.
If a player has no available power, hes unable to establish control.
Important: A player may only establish control when vacating
an area with a March Order. Events that would leave an area
vacant (such as negative effects from a Wildling victory) does not
permit a player to establish control after the last unit is destroyed.
Controlling Home Areas
Each House has a home area marked by its House shield (printed
directly on the game board). From the beginning of the game, a
House is considered to have established control of its own home
area, meaning the printed House shield functions like a Power token
that cannot be removed.
Players can control enemy home areas by either a) keeping
friendly units in these areas, or b) by establishing control over the
enemy home area. When establishing control over an enemy home
area, the friendly Power token is placed directly over the printed
enemy House shield.
If a player chooses not to, or cannot, leave a Power token behind
when vacating an enemy players home area, control of that home
area immediately reverts back to its original House.
Reminder: A retreating army can never retreat into an area
containing an enemy Power token.
Alliances
Players are always free (in any phase, at any time) to make
promises and seek alliances with other Houses. Promises and
alliances, however, are never binding and can be broken for any
reason. Even the staunchest ally cannot be 100% sure of the good
intentions of his partners. The Iron Throne, after all, can seat
only one.
There are three strict rules governing what conspiring players
are allowed to do:
Players may never show other players (in public or secret),
any assigned Order token. Nor may a player show unused
Order tokens to other players during the Planning Phase
(so that others may, by deduction or estimation, know
what the player may have assigned to the game board).
A player may also never give, donate, bribe, etc. any game
item such as Power tokens, Dominance tokens, Order
tokens, House cards, etc. to another player.
Bids must always be made in secret. A player may not
show any opponent his bid before revealing it.
A Game of Thrones
Ports
Ports function as a special area between the land and sea area
they connect. Only the player controlling the connected land area
may use the connected Port and is considered the Ports owner.
Using Ports
Port areas may only be occupied by Ship units. Multiple Ship
units occupying a Port are considered an army and must be
in compliance with supply limits. In addition to normal army
restrictions, a Port may never contain more than three Ship
units at one time.
If the land area connected to a Port musters new units, the
player may muster Ship units directly in the Port itself or in the
adjacent sea area.
A player may muster Ship units into a connected Port, even if
the connected sea area is occupied by one or more Enemy Ship
units. (In fact, the ability to muster ships in a port, even if the
connected sea area is occupied by enemy units, is the single most
powerful feature of Ports.)
Orders in Ports
Just as units in normal areas, Ship units in a Port area must
receive an Order token during the Assign Orders step of the
Planning Phase. While Defense orders may be placed on a Port,
they have no effect as Ports cannot be attacked directly.
Other Port Rules
Ships units may march from an adjacent sea area into a
friendly Port, or may march from a Port into an adjacent
sea area. However, Ship units may never march into a
Port owned by another player.
Ship units in a Port may support a combat in the adjacent
sea area but may not support a combat in any adjacent
land area (not even in its connected land area). Ship
units in a Port provide no defensive Combat Strength to a
combat in its connected land area.
Ship units in a Port may raid the adjacent sea area, but
may not raid any adjacent land area.
Ship units in a connected sea area may raid a Port. Enemy
units in adjacent land areas, however, may not raid a Port.
If, during the Resolve Consolidate Power Orders step of the
Action Phase, there are enemy ships in the sea area connected
to a port, any Consolidate Power Order assigned to the Port
is removed without effect. Otherwise, a Consolidate Power
Order in a Port is resolved normally (as if it was in a land area
containing no Power icons).
A Special Consolidate Power Order cannot be used to
muster units if placed on a port, but may still be used to
collect power as normal (subject to the above point).
Taking Control of Enemy Ports
If the land area connected to a Port is successfully attacked and
taken control of by another player, that player may immediately
replace any enemy Ship units in the Port with an equal number
of his own available Ship units (or as many Ship units as he has
available, he desires, or is allowed by supply limits). Excess enemy
ships are simply removed from the board.
Trade with the Free Cities
When the Game of Thrones Westeros card is resolved during
the Westeros Phase, in addition to collecting power for each
Power icon, players receive one Power token for each friendly Port
containing at least one friendly Ship unit, as long as the Ports
connected sea area does not contain enemy Ships.
A Mustering Westeros card was just drawn during the
Westeros Phase. Martell is first in the turn order and so
musters units first.
Martell uses the 2 mustering points provided by Sunspear to
muster one Footman and one Ship unit. He decides to place the
Ship unit in the Port of Sunspear (it may also have been placed in
the Sea of Dorne, but not the Tyrell-occupied East Summer Sea).
Later, during the Planning Phase, Martell assigns a Raid
Order to the Port of Sunspear. In the Action Phase, he executes
that Order to cancel a Support Order assigned to the East
Summer Sea.
Example of Port Use
A Game of Thrones
Garrisons
Garrisons are special tokens that provide
extra defense to the home area of each House.
Each House starts the game with a
Garrison token on its home area. Garrisons
are not units, so they do not count toward
Supply limits and may never be assigned an order.
If a home area containing a Garrison is attacked, the strength
of the Garrison (the value printed on the token) is added to the
defenders initial Combat Strength (see page 17). If there are no
units defending a location with a Garrison token, combat still
occurs as normal as if the Garrison was a single unit.
If a Garrison is defeated in combat (whether defending by itself
or with other friendly units), it is permanently removed from the
game, regardless of the number of Sword or Fortification icons on
House cards played in the combat.
Players may not assign orders to an area containing only
a Garrison. A Garrisons strength is only used when its area is
attacked, not for support or any other purpose. Garrisons are
purely defensive forces.
Garrisons are immune to the effect of Skull icons on the Tides
of Battle cards, see page 29.
Neutral Force Tokens
Neutral Force tokens represent the resistance of independent
houses unwilling to submit to the machinations of the players.
Neutral forces are placed on the board during setup.
Players may march units into an area occupied by a Neutral Force
in order to destroy the Neutral Force and control the area. This may
not be attempted, however, unless the marching player has sufficient
Combat Strength to defeat the Neutral Force.
Destroying a Neutral Force
In order to destroy a Neutral Force and gain control of its area,
a marching player must equal or exceed the strength value printed
on the Neutral Force token by the combination of Combat Strength
factors listed below:
Count the Combat Strength of the marching units (Siege
Engines only count their strength if the Neutral Forces
area contains a Castle or Stronghold).
No House cards are played.
The March Order bonus (or penalty) applies.
Neutral Forces cannot receive support from adjacent areas.
The attacking player may receive support against the
Neutral Force from adjacent areas (as in combat).
The Valyrian Steel Blade may not be used to receive a
+1 bonus.
If the marching players Combat Strength equals or exceeds the
Neutral Forces strength value, the token is destroyed and removed
from the game. The marching player moves his units into the area
as normal.
Marching against a Neutral Force counts as the March Orders
one allowed attack.
Most Neutral Force tokens
used in three-player games are
marked with a ~ in place of their
strength value. These represent
insurmountable areas which
cannot be entered. Areas containing
such tokens are therefore off-limits to all players for the entirety of
the game.
Attacking a Neutral Force
Tyrell wishes to march into Sunspear from Yronwood.
However, Sunspear contains a Neutral Force token with a
strength of 5.
The Tyrell army contains 1 Knight and 1 Footman and is
using the March +1 Special order, giving Tyrell a total of 4
Combat Strength. To bring his Combat Strength to 5, Tyrell
calls upon his Support order in the Sea of Dorne, where a
single Ship unit grants him 1 supporting Combat Strength.
Because the Tyrell army (strength 5 when counting the
support) now equals the strength value of the Neutral Force
token, the march is successful and the Sunspear Neutral Force
token is destroyed. Tyrell then marches his army into Sunspear.
A Game of Thrones
Game Board Features
While the game board consists mainly of land and sea areas,
there are three unique features that deserve additional explanation:
Rivers: These watery boundaries prevent
movement between the land areas they
divide. In other words, two areas separated
by a river are not, for any game purpose
(marching, supporting, raiding, etc)
considered adjacent.
Bridges: As an exception to the above
rule for rivers, any two areas separated by a
river and joined by a bridge, are considered
adjacent for all game purposes.
Island Areas: Three land areas
(Dragonstone, Pyke, and The Arbor)
are special in that theyre completely
surrounded by sea areas. Even so, they are
still considered land areas and must follow
all normal rules for land areas.
Due to their special island status, however,
Footmen, Knights, and Siege Engines must
use Ship transport when moving to and from these areas.
All other small islands on the game board (i.e., without a white
border) are for cosmetic purposes only and are not actual play areas.
Adjusting
Influence Tracks
There are a few cards (such as Doran Martells House card, or
the A King Beyond the Wall Wildling card) that force Influence
tokens to shift on the Influence tracks outside the normal bidding
that occurs during a Clash of Kings Westeros Card.
Whenever a player shifts position on an Influence track
due to such special circumstance, all other players must adjust
accordingly. For example, if one player is required to shift to the
highest position on a track (the 1 position), the current player in
that position must shift backwards to the 2 position, etc. If such a
shift would cause a player to lose the 1 position on any track,
he must immediately give the corresponding Dominance token
(in the same state it was in, used or available) to the new player
inhabiting the 1 position. Such a shift on the Kings Court track
does not affect any special orders already assigned legally to the
board, but may restrain or expand their availability during the
next Planning Phase.
The Arbor
Hidden Information
Each player is provided with a player screen to keep certain
elements of the game hidden from the other players.
From the very beginning of the game, players should always keep
their unused Order tokens behind their player screens.
Except just prior to any bidding, each players available power
tokens must remain visible for all other players to see.
Whenever players are instructed to bid in the game (such as for
position on the Influence tracks or to stave off wildling attacks), it
is good practice for all players to first announce their total available
power after which all players temporarily pull their available power
tokens behind their player screen before secretly selecting their bid.
Available Power tokens hidden in this manner stay behind the
player screens for the duration of the bidding. At the end of bidding,
available Power tokens are made visible to other players once more.
The contents of a players House card discard pile and his hand of
House cards is open information except when players are choosing
House cards during Step 3 of combat.
A Game of Thrones
Playing With Fewer than six players
Five-Player Games
In a five-player game, House Martell cannot be chosen as a
player House.
During setup for a five-player game, place the nine Neutral
Force tokens marked with the 4-6 and 4-5 player ranges on the
game board, matching the name on each Neutral Force token to its
corresponding area on the map. Make sure all Neutral Force tokens
are placed with the correct player range face up.
Four-Player Games
In a four-player game, neither House Martell nor House Tyrell
can be chosen as player Houses.
During setup for a four-player game, place all 12 Neutral Force
tokens marked with the 4-6, 4-5, and 4 player ranges on the
game board, matching the name on each Neutral Force token to its
corresponding area on the map. Make sure all Neutral Force tokens
are placed with the correct player range face up.
Then place the Kings Court Overlay on top of the Kings Court
Influence track, covering the first four positions (see diagram).
Three-Player Games
In a three-player game, House Martell, House Tyrell, and House
Greyjoy cannot be chosen as player Houses.
During setup for a three-player game, place the 14 Neutral
Force tokens marked with the 3 player range on the game
board, matching the name on each Neutral Force token to its
corresponding area on the map. Make sure all Neutral Force tokens
are placed with the correct player range face up.
Then place the Kings Court Overlay on top of the Kings Court
Influence track, covering the first four positions (see diagram).
Five-Player Game Setup
Four-Player Game Setup
Kings Court Overlay
Three-Player Game Setup
Kings Court Overlay
A Game of Thrones
Tides of Battle is an optional module to A Game of Thrones: The
Board Game that adds an element of unpredictably and deadliness
to combat. This increased risk can make negotiation even more
vital, gaining support in combat more critical; it creates additional
drama (and casualties) in combat and breeds entirely different
strategies for your A Game of Thrones: The Board Game experience.
Before playing, all players should agree whether to use this option.
If agreed, shuffle the Tides of Battle cards into a single deck, placing it
near the game board during setup.
Tides of Battle makes the following modifications to combat:
1. Drawing Tides of Battle
Cards: After choosing and revealing
House cards, the attacking and
defending player each draw one
Tides of Battle card from the top of
the deck and privately examines it.
2. Using the Valyrian Steel
Blade: Before revealing the two
Tides of Battle cards, if either the
attacking or defending player holds
the Valyrian Steel Blade token, he may use it to discard his
first Tides of Battle card and draw another one to replace it.
He must keep the new Tides of Battle card. He then flips his
Valyrian Steel Blade token to its faded side to show it has been
used this game round.
3. Revealing Tides of Battle Cards: Each player reveals
his Tides of Battle card, adding the specified Combat Strength
modifier (the number in
the shield) to his current
Combat Strength.
4. Modify Casualties:
Each player then adds any
Sword or Fortification icons
on his Tides of Battle card
to his House card (as if they
were printed on his played
House card).
Tides of Battle
Added to House
card icons
Added to
combat strength
After resolving casualties from Sword icons, players resolve any
Skull icons on drawn Tides of Battle cards as follows:
If a players Tides of Battle card features a Skull icon, the
opposing player must suffer one casualty regardless of which
player was victorious in the combat.
This casualty is in addition to any other casualties
dealt during combat, and cannot be prevented by
Fortification icons. Removing this casualty follows all
other rules and restrictions found on page 21.
Skull Icon
A Game of Thrones
Playtesters: Greg Benage, Daniel Lovat Clark, Mike Dockerty,
Tony Doepner, Gabriel Dudrey, David Gagner, John Goodenough,
Derek Goodwin, Darrell Hardy, Patrick Harrigan, Carl Hotchkiss,
Chris Hulke, Eric M. Lang, Adrian Larson, Dallas Mehlhoff, Matt
Mehlhoff, Kevin Melby, Jerry Murphy, Andrew Navaro, Scott
Nicely, Brian Olmstead, Eric Olsen, Matthew Pohl, Tina Reynolds,
Brian Schomburg, Shawn Sieben, John Sweeney, James Torr, Eric
Tyrell, Aaron Van Koningsveld, Robert Vaughn, Joe Veen, James
Voelker, Scott Weber, Kevin Wilson, Brian Wood, Zach Yanzer,
Katin Yang, Touyee Yang, and Jamie Zephyr.
Special Thanks to: Daniel & Kat Abraham, Edge Studio, Tony
Doepner, Carl Keim, Eric M. Lang, George R.R. Martin, Kay
McCauley, Gretchen D. Petersen, Thomas H. Petersen, Robert
Vaughn, Melinda M. Snodgrass, and Mike Zebrowski.
The names, descriptions, and depictions applied to this game are
derived from works copyrighted by George R. R. Martin, and may not
be used or reused without his permission.
2011 George R.R. Martin, 2011 Fantasy Flight Publishing, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this product may be reproduced without
specific written permission. A Song of Ice and Fire 2011, used under
License. A Game of Thrones The Board Game, Fantasy Flight Games,
Fantasy Flight Supply, and the FFG logo are trademarks of Fantasy
Flight Publishing, Inc. Fantasy Flight Games is located at 1975 West
County Road B2, Suite 1, Roseville, Minnesota, 55113, USA, and can
be reached by telephone at 651-639-1905. Retain this information for
your records. Not suitable for children under 36 months due to small
parts. Made in China. THIS PRODUCT IS NOT A TOY. NOT INTENDED
FOR PERSONS AGES 13 OR YOUNGER.
Visit Us on the Web:
www.FantasyFlightGames.com
Credits
Based on the A Song of Ice and Fire novels by
George R.R. Martin
Game Design: Christian T. Petersen
Additional Game Development: Corey Konieczka, Jason
Walden, and Kevin Wilson
Producer: Jason Walden
Rules Writing: Christian T. Petersen and Jason Walden
Editing and Proofreading: Molly Glover, Michael Hurley,
Corey Konieczka, Matt Mehlhoff, Sarah Sadler,
Julian Smith, and Anton Torres.
Graphic Design: David Ardila, Kevin Childress,
Brian Schomburg, and Michael Silsby
Cover Art: Tomasz Jedruszek
Map Art: Henning Ludvigsen
Interior Art: Alex Aparin, Ryan Barger, Mike Capprotti,
Trevor Cook, Thomas Denmark, Adam Denton, Chris
Dien, Sacha Diener, Mark Evans, Anders Finer, John
Gravato, Chris Griffin, Rafal Hrynkiewicz, Tomasz
Jedruszek, Andrew Johanson, Michael Komarck, Henning
Ludvigsen, John Matson, Dennis McElroy, Patrick
McEvoy, Torstein Nordstrand, Roman V. Papsuev, Natasha
Roeoesli, Grzegorz Rutkowski, Mark Simonett, Johnathan
Standing, Matthew Starbuck, SYM7, Xia Taptara, Jean Tay,
Sedone Thongvilay, Tim Truman, Magali Villeneuve,
and Doug Williams.
Sandor Clegane, Melisandre, Eddard Stark, and Loras Tyrell
card art copyright Michael Komarck.
Figure Photography and 3d Imaging: Jason Beaudoin
Art Direction: Zo Robinson
Managing Art Director: Andrew Navaro
Managing Graphic Designer: Brian Schomburg
FFG Licensing Coordinator: Deb Beck
Production Manager: Eric Knight
Executive Game Designer: Corey Konieczka
Executive Producer: Michael Hurley
Publisher: Christian T. Petersen
FANTASY FLIGHT GAMES
Now that youve experienced the intrigue and excitement of A Game of Thrones: The Board Game, see the Seven
Kingdoms in a whole new way with Battles of Westeros!
This epic board game of battlefield tactics lets players control either House Stark, the stoic and honorable wards of
Winterfell, or House Lannister, a cunning force funded by an endless supply of gold. And with an ever-growing selection
of expansions, you can even enlist the support of House Tully, the clans of the Vale, and more! Manage realistic factors
like troop deployment, communication, and morale as you guide your forces into the fray. Only the most clever and
fearless tacticians can claim victory. Are you ready to earn glory for your house?
BW01 - Battles of Westeros
BW02 - Wardens of the West
BW03 - Wardens of the North
BW04 - Lords of the River
BW06 - Tribes of the Vale

A Game of Thrones
A Game of Thrones

INDEX:
Dominance Tokens....................................................11
Iron Throne Token............................................................... 11
Messenger Raven Token................................................... 11
Valyrian Steel Blade Token.............................................. 11
Enemy/Opponent, Definition....................................6
Friend/Friendly, Definition........................................6
Game Round................................................................7
Game Setup.................................................................4
Garrisons....................................................................26
Hidden Information..................................................27
Home Area, Definition................................................6
House Cards...............................................................19
House Card Breakdown............................................19
House/Player, Definition............................................6
Influence Track Bidding, Example...........................10
Influence Tracks........................................................11
Influence Tracks, Adjustments................................27
Neutral Force Tokens................................................26
Object of the Game.....................................................2
Overview......................................................................2
Planning Phase..........................................................12
Player Screen Diagram...............................................6
Playing With Fewer Than Six Players.....................28
Ports...........................................................................24
Power, collecting and discarding...............................6
Raid Order.................................................................13
Raid Order Resolution, Example.............................14
Retreats and Routing...............................................21
Rivers.........................................................................27
Setup Diagram............................................................5
Ship Transport..........................................................23
Ship Transport, Example..........................................23
Supply, Example..........................................................8
Support Order...........................................................13
Tides of Battle cards..................................................29
Turn Order, Definition................................................6
Unit Combat Strengths............................................17
Unit, Definition...........................................................6
Westeros Cards............................................................7
Westeros Card: Clash of Kings.................................10
Westeros Card: Mustering.........................................9
Westeros Card: Supply...............................................8
Westeros Phase...........................................................7
Wilding Attacks........................................................22
Winning the Game...................................................16
Index
Action Phase, The......................................................14
Resolve Consolidate Power Orders.............................. 16
Resolve March Orders....................................................... 15
Resolve Raid Orders........................................................... 14
Alliances.....................................................................26
Area, Definition...........................................................6
Army/Armies, Definition...........................................6
Assign Orders............................................................12
Available Power, Definition........................................6
Battle Clean Up.........................................................21
Bridges.......................................................................27
Casualties...................................................................20
Combat.......................................................................17
Call for Support.................................................................... 17
Calculate Initial Combat Strength............................... 18
Choose and Reveal House Cards.................................. 19
Calculate Final Combat Strength................................. 20
Use Valyrian Steel Blade.................................................. 20
Resolve the Combat............................................................ 20
Determine Combat Victor................................................ 20
Component List...........................................................2
Component Overview.................................................3
Consolidate Power Order..........................................13
Controlling Areas......................................................23
Controlling Home Areas..........................................24
Defence Order............................................................13
Destroy, Definition......................................................6


GAME NAME:
Through the Ages: A New Story of Civilization

The purpose of this Handbook is to teach the game to new players. In addition to presenting the rules, it lays out a path for learning the game.
All the concepts are explained in the order in which you will encounter them as you play. You will also find many helpful examples.
Most of this Handbook describes a shortened and simplified version of the game designed for people learning to play. This makes the explanation
simpler and allows you to play your first game faster. Also, players do not attack each other, which allows everyone to focus on grasping the
mechanics and enjoying their first civilization. But it is certainly not a soft game. It will still last several hours, providing a very complex and
competitive experience.
The full game includes additional mechanics and concepts, which are introduced on pages 22 and 23. For players who have already played their
first game, moving to the full game is an easy step. Your second game can be played according to the full rules.
The Code of Laws is the companion rulebook to this one. It presents the complete rules of the full game in a logical order. If you understand the
basic principles of the game, you should be able to quickly find an answer to any rules question in the Code of Laws. It also has an Appendix that
provides additional explanations of some cards.
The Code of Laws can be helpful even as you are reading this book. You should consult it if you feel you do not fully understand a rule or a card.
Just remember that it describes only the full version of the game.
If you have played a previous version of this game (Through the Ages: A Story of Civilization) you do not need to read this book. Most of the concepts
remain the same, so you should have no trouble following the Code of Laws. For your convenience, the back page of this Handbook explains the
differences between the two versions.
Get ready to build a civilization that will thrive through the ages.
In this game, each player develops a civilization from Antiquity to the present, striving to leave a lasting
impression on history. Your civilization scores culture points for its influence on world affairs through
literature, drama, religion, wondrous constructions, and great leaders. Initially, all civilizations are the
same, but the choices you make will swiftly differentiate yours from the others. It is up to you to decide
if you will make your mark by encouraging the arts, by plundering weaker rivals, or by building fast food
franchises. At the end of the game, the player with the most culture points wins.
Through the Ages: What story will you tell?
Handbook - Your First Game
About this Book
Code of Laws
The Original Story
SETUP:
Player Areas In Through the Ages, there is no map. You build your civilization on the table
in the space in front of you. This space is called your player area.
Player Board
Your player board is the main part of your player area. To set it up:
Choose a color.
Put the player board in that color on the table in front of you. Around it, leave plenty of space into which your
civilization can grow.
Player Pieces
Each player takes a set of 7 wooden pieces in his or her color. Before the first game, you may decorate them with the
stickers provided.

Tactics Standard
This piece marks the current tactic being used by a civilization's military forces.
Points Counters
The octagonal counters are used to track accumulated culture points and science points.
Rating Markers
The round markers are used to indicate four ratings of each player's civilization:
culture production, science production, military strength, and happiness.
Put your happiness rating marker on space 0 of the happiness indicator on your player board.
The transparent cubes are blue, yellow, white, and red
tokens. You will need a number of these in your play area:
 Take 16 blue tokens and put them on the squares of
your blue bank.
 Take 25 yellow tokens and put them on the remaining
squares on your player board: 18 in your yellow bank,
1 in your worker pool, and 6 on technologies.
Take 4 white tokens and 2 red tokens and put them
next to the right edge of your player board.
Once everyone has set up their player boards, return the
remaining tokens to the box, or keep them somewhere
else out of reach. Usually, you will move tokens within
your player area. Only rarely do you need to get new
tokens from the box or return tokens to the box.
Workers
The seven yellow tokens that are not in your yellow bank
are called workers. They represent the initial population
of your civilization.
Six of them begin the game on various cards. These
workers represent one military u nit, t wo f arms, t wo
mines, and one lab..
The seventh worker is in your worker pool. It is called
an unused worker. It does nothing useful now, but it is
available to be put to work.
The six cards printed on your player board
are your initial technologies. We refer to
them as cards, even though they are printed
on the board. They represent what your
civilization knows and what it can build.
Initial Technologies
Blue Bank Yellow Bank
The yellow tokens in your yellow bank do
not represent workers. You may think o f
them as unused land in your territory.
Whenever your population increases, you
take the rightmost yellow token from
the yellow bank and put it in your worker
pool. You gain a worker, but having fewer
tokens in your yellow bank means less
available land in your territory. As your
population density increases, so do your
people's demands. This is represented by
the sections and subsections of your yellow
bank.
At the beginning of the game, your people
do not consume stored food. They can hunt
or grow it for themselves. You use up stored
food only when you want your population
to grow. The cost of increasing your
population is depicted under each section.
As your population grows, the yellow
bank empties. You will need some food to
maintain your population, and increasing
the population will cost you more food.
Blue tokens represent food and
resources. On a farm technology,
they are food. On a mine
technology, they are resources.
You keep the blue tokens in your
blue bank until they are needed.
When your workers produce food
and resources, you move blue
tokens from your blue bank to the
cards. Always move the rightmost
tokens first.
When you use the food and
resources, you return the tokens to
your blue bank. Fill empty spaces
from left to right.
If a section of your blue bank is
empty, it means your civilization
is storing a lot of food and
resources. This is not a problem if
you spend them during your turn,
but if you still have empty sections
at the end of your turn, you will
face corruption.
Military Unit Technology (red)
The Warriors technology allows you to build
warriors, which are military units. The 1
worker on the card represents 1 warrior
unit. The symbol at the bottom depicts each
unit's strength. Your one warrior gives your
civilization a strength rating of 1.
The icon in the upper right corner means
that units on the Warriors card are infantry.
Later, you may invent more advanced
infantry units, as well as cavalry and
artillery.
Tokens
Set Up - Player Areas
Happiness Indicator
Various urban buildings, wonders, and
leaders provide happy faces  a symbolic
representation of things that keep your people
happy, such as art, religion, or entertainment.
Your total number of happy faces is indicated
by your happiness marker above your yellow
bank. At the beginning of the game, the only
technology that provides happy faces is Religion.
Because you have no workers on that card, you
have no temples , so your happiness rating
marker begins on space 0.
Happiness becomes more important as your
yellow bank empties. As your population rises,
your people will require some entertainment.
Each subsection of your yellow bank has a number
above it. When that subsection is empty, you will
need at least that many happy faces. Otherwise,
you will have discontent workers, which could
lead to an uprising.
Quick Reference Sheet
Each player may take a quick reference sheet. One side
summarizes the course of one player's turn. (For your first
game, you will ignore the parts shaded red.)
The other side defines common terms and actions. If you
are not sure what the text on a card means, refer to that
list.
YOUR TURN:
Farm and Mine Technologies
(brown)
Agriculture is a farm technology, which
allows you to build farms . Bronze is a mine
technology, which allows you to build mines .
The card itself does not represent an actual
farm or mine. It is just the knowledge required
to build them. Farms and mines are represented
by your workers on the cards. You start the
game with two farms and two mines.
The symbols at the bottom of these technology
cards say how much food or resources
each farm or mine produces. Food is important
for increasing and maintaining your population.
Resources are used to build farms, mines, urban
buildings, wonders, and military units.
Urban Building Technologies (gray)
Philosophy allows you to build labs and Religion
allows you to build temples . As with farms
and mines, actual buildings are represented by
workers on the cards. The card itself just means
you know how to build them. At the beginning of
the game, you have 1 lab, but you have no temples
yet  there is no worker on the Religion card.
The icons at the bottom of each urban building
technology depict what is produced by each
building on the card. Your one lab produces a total
of 1 science . Your temples would produce
1 culture and 1 happy face each, but you
have no temples yet.
The icon in the upper right corner defines
the type of the card and the type of the buildings
that are on it. Later, you may invent more
advanced labs and temples or even completely
new types of buildings.
Government (orange)
The orange card represents your civilization's system
of government. It specifies the number of civil actions
and military actions available each turn. These actions
represent the effectiveness of your government. They
determine how many different things you can do.
Every civilization begins with Despotism. The 4 white
cubes and 2 red cubes printed on the card indicate
that you have 4 civil actions and 2 military actions at
your disposal. These are represented by the white and red
tokens you have next to your board.
Later, you may switch to a more advanced form of
government, which will give you more civil and military
actions.
Ages and Levels
The A symbol at the top of each initial technology means
that these cards belong to Age A  Antiquity. Any card in
the game belongs to one of four ages:
 Age A: Antiquity (BC and the first few centuries AD)
 Age I: Medieval Times (up to the 16th century)
 Age II: The Age of Exploration (up to the 19th century)
 Age III: The Modern Era (the 20th century)
In your first game, you will not use Age III cards. The game
will end when you reach the Modern Era.
Sometimes, the rules or a card will refer to the level
of a card. This is simply the card's age represented as
a number: Cards of Age A have level 0. Age I is level 1.
Age II is level 2. Age III is level 3.
The level or age of a farm, mine, urban building, or
military unit is the same as the level or age of the card
that it is on.
Set Up - Common Areas Science Board
Science represents a civilization's knowledge and its ability to discover and adopt
new ideas and inventions.
Science Rating Indicator
A civilization's science rating is how many science points it produces each turn.
The rating changes whenever the player builds or destroys something that
produces science.
 All players' science rating markers (the round ones) start on space 1 of the
science rating indicator.
Check your player board. You begin with one Age A lab , as represented by the
worker on the Philosophy technology. The 1 symbol at the bottom of the card
means that each lab on the card produces 1 science. This is why your science rating
is 1.
Science Points Track
Civilizations score science points ( ) during the game, usually based on their
science rating. They spend science points to develop technologies.
 All players' science point counters (the octagonal ones) start on space 0 of the
science point track.
You start the game with no science points. Because your science rating is 1, you
will get your first point of science at the end of your first turn.
Culture Board
Culture represents the impact and influence a civilization has on the entire
world. Whether through art, religion, wonders, or even aggressions and wars,
a civilization needs to spread its culture. At the end of the game, the civilization
with the most culture points wins!
Culture Rating Indicator
A civilization's culture rating is how many culture points it produces each turn.
The rating changes whenever the player builds or destroys something that
produces culture.
 All players' culture rating markers (the round ones) start on space 0 of the
culture rating indicator.
On your player board, you see that Religion is the only card that could allow you to
produce culture. Because you have no workers on the card, you have no temples ,
and so your civilization produces no culture.
Culture Points Track
A civilization scores culture points ( ) during the game, usually based on its
culture rating, but also for other deeds. Sometimes, a civilization may also lose
culture points.
All player's culture point counters (the octagonal ones) start on space 0 of the
Set up the game boards in the center of the table in any configuration
that makes it easy for everyone to see them.
Decks
There are two types of cards  civil cards and military cards.
We already know some civil cards: All the initial technologies
printed on your player board are Age A civil cards. The military
cards will enter the game later.
 Separate the cards into eight decks according to their backs.
Straight Out of the Box
If your game is new, the cards are already sorted into 8 decks,
except for the cards that are used only in 3- or 4-player games.
Your first game will be shorter and not very militant. To ensure
that, you need to adjust the decks:
 Return both Age III decks to the box. Your first game will
have one age less than the full game.
 From the Age I and II military decks use only these cards:
 Events and territories (green cards, with the symbol
in the upper right corner)
 Tactics (red, with military unit icons in the bottom half)
 Military bonus cards (half brown / half green)
The civil decks need to be smaller when you play with fewer
than 4 players. For a 2- or 3-player game, remove certain cards
from the Age I and Age II civil decks.
Cards to be removed are marked in the upper right corner:
 For a 3-player game, remove the 3 cards
marked Republic 4 from each deck.
 For a 2-player game, remove the 6 cards
marked Monarchy 3+ and the 3 cards marked Republic 4 from
each deck.
So now you should have the six decks you will need for the
game.
 Shuffle each deck separately.
During setup, you need only the Age A decks. Keep the Age I and
Age II decks nearby. They will be used later in the game.
Card Row
The card row displays civil cards that players may
choose from. It is the central element of the game.
Players' civilizations will be defined by the cards
they take from the card row. Place it so that everyone
can reach it and read the cards easily.
Deal 13 cards from the Age A civil deck face up to the
spaces of the card row.
Strength Indicator
Strength represents the might of a civilization's
military units, its knowledge of warfare, and other
military advantages. In your first game, it will be
less crucial than in the full game because there will
be no direct conflicts. However, strength is still
relevant because stronger civilizations often benefit
from events that happen during the game, while
weaker civilizations may suffer.
 All players' strength rating markers start on
space 1 of the strength rating indicator.
On your player board, you have 1 worker on your
Warriors card. This represents a warrior unit, which
has strength 1. Because this is the only contribution
to your strength, you have a strength rating of 1.
Common Tactics Area
The common tactics area is a space in the middle
of the military board. Military tactics cards will be
placed here during the game to represent that they
have become known to all civilizations.
 Put the tactics standards of all civilizations in
the common tactics area.
These standards mark the current tactic of each
player. At the start of the game, they are on no card
 each player begins with no current tactic.
Events Decks
Two spaces on the military board are for events
decks, which hold events that will happen during
the game. The first few events are randomly chosen
from the Age A military deck and placed on the
current events space to make the current events
deck. They are mostly positive.
During the game, players will choose events from
their hands and place them on the future events
space. Each time a future event is prepared,
a current event will be revealed. When all the Age
A events are gone, the future events will become the
new current events deck.
 Depending on the number of players, take the
top 4, 5, or 6 cards from the Age A military deck
and set them face down on the board as the
current events deck. The number of cards is the
number of players plus two.
 Return the rest of the Age A military deck to the
box without looking at the cards.
The space for the future events deck is empty at the
start of the game.
Past Events Pile
Events that are evaluated during the game are
discarded to the past events pile face up. These
events will not enter the game again.
Set Up - Common Areas
Current Age Board
This small board holds the civil and military decks
for the current age.
Current Age Civil Deck
The current age civil deck holds the cards that are
dealt to the card row.
 After dealing cards to the card row, put the rest
of the Age A civil deck on the current age board.
Current Age Military Deck
The current age military deck holds cards that can
be drawn at the end of a turn. In Age A, however,
this space remains empty. Players will never draw
Age A military cards.
Starting Player
Randomly determine the starting player. The starting
player does not change during the game and has
no special role. However, to ensure that everyone
gets the same number of turns, it is important to
remember who the starting player was. If you like,
you can mark the starting player by sliding one of
the unused Age A military cards partially under that
player's board.
Actions for the First Round
On their first turn, players do not have all their
actions available. The white and red tokens next
to the player board represent actions that are not
available. Available actions are indicated with white
and red tokens on a player's government card.
 The starting player puts 1 of his or her white
tokens on his or her Despotism card.
 The next player (in clockwise order) puts 2 white
tokens on his or her Despotism card.
 The third player puts 3 white tokens on his or her
card.
 The fourth player puts 4 white tokens on his or
her card.
Thus for their first turns, the players will have 1, 2,
3, or 4 civil actions available and no military actions.

Game Overview
The First Round
Round One
The game begins in Antiquity, which serves as
a preparatory round for the rest of the game. In the
first round, players have just a few civil actions. They
take cards from the card row to shape the way their
civilizations will initially grow. Each player's turn
ends with production of science, food, and resources.
Round Two
From the second round on, a few new civil cards
appear in the card row at the beginning of each
player's turn. The Middle Ages begin in the second
round, and Age I cards appear in the card row.
On their second turn, players may begin building and
developing their civilizations. They may use all their
civil and military actions, and they may do more than
just take cards. They will also have an opportunity to
draw military cards after production.
The Rest of the Game
From the third round on, players will have military
cards. These allow players to plot political maneuvers
and improve their military forces with tactics.
Of course, players continue to work on increasing
their population, developing new technologies,
and expanding their production of food, resources,
science, and culture. They will take steps to ensure
their people remain happy, and they may also need
to deal with corruption.
Advancing through the Ages
When the Age I civil cards run out, Age II, the Age
of Exploration, begins. Certain antiquated cards are
discarded, and populations become more demanding,
but otherwise, the game continues under the same
rules. Age II civil and military cards enter the game,
bringing advanced technologies, industrial wonders,
and enlightened leaders.
The End
Your first game is shortened. When the Age II civil
deck runs out, the game is near its end. Again, certain
antiquated cards are discarded and the demands of
your population increase. Age III, The Modern Era,
begins, but you do not use Age III cards. Each player
is granted at least one more turn to put the finishing
touches on a glorious civilization. The player to the
right of the starting player will take the final turn,
so that everyone will finish with the same number of
turns. The player with the most culture points wins.
Learn as You Play
You can play the game as you read this book. Set up
the game as described. Then read The First Round,
and play the first round of the game. Read The Second
Round, and play the second round of the game. Read
Subsequent Rounds, and continue playing. After the
Age I civil deck runs out, read End of an Age. At that
time, you should also read End of the Game so you
know what to concentrate on during Age II.
The game starts in Antiquity, a preparatory round in which players take a few
cards from the card row. This defines your civilization's ancient heritage.
Each player takes one turn according to the first-round rules.
Your first turn has only 2 phases:
 In the Action Phase, you may take one or more cards from the card row.
 During the End-of-Turn Sequence, your civilization produces some food,
resources, and science. You end your turn by making all your actions available
for the next turn.
Available Actions
Each player begins with a different number of white
tokens on his or her Despotism card. Each white token
on a card represents an available civil action.
The remaining white tokens, as well as both red
tokens, are beside the government card. In the first
round, these are not available.
For the first round, you have only 1, 2, 3, or 4 civil
actions available, depending on your place in the
order of play. These may only be used to take cards
from the card row.
In later rounds, you begin your turn with all actions
available.
Taking Cards
The card row begins with 13 civil cards from Age A.
It costs a certain number of civil actions to take
a card. The cost is depicted below the card's space in
the card row: 1 civil action to take one of the first five
cards, 2 for one of the next four, 3 for one of the four
rightmost cards.
To take a card from the card row, you must pay the
number of civil actions depicted under it.
Paying Civil Actions
To pay civil actions, you take the corresponding
number of white tokens off your government card
and place them beside your board. These are spent
actions. They are no longer available to be used this
turn.
The starting player has only one civil action, so he
or she can only take one of the 5 cards in the first
section of the card row. The second player can take
up to 2 cards from that section, or 1 card from the
middle section. Players do not have to use all their
actions if they do not want to.
Age A Cards
There are 3 types of cards in Antiquity: leaders
(green), wonders (purple), and action cards (yellow).
Leaders
A leader is a great historical
figure whom you choose to be
the spiritual guide of your
civilization. The leader's legacy
gives you special abilities and
benefits. These may be
described in the text of the card
or depicted symbolically at the
bottom.
When you take a leader card,
you keep it in your hand. It has no effect until you put
it into play. In the first round, you are not allowed to
put leaders into play, so keep it in your hand for now.
In all rounds, you are subject to the following
limitation:
You may not take 2 leaders from the same age.
Once you have taken an Age A leader, you may never
take another one. This limitation applies regardless
of whether the card enters or leaves play. But you are
not prevented from taking one of the Age I leaders.
Wonders
Wonders are the most epic
constructions in the game.
They provide significant
benefits, but they take time and
resources to build.
Wonders are the only cards
that you put directly into play
as soon as you take them.
You never put a wonder in your
hand. When you take a wonder from the card row,
place it next to your player board. Turn it sideways
to indicate that it is under construction. We call it an
unfinished wonder.
You are only allowed to have 1 unfinished wonder
in play. You cannot take a new wonder card if you
currently have an unfinished wonder.
When you complete the wonder, you will turn it right
side up to indicate that it is now completed. At that
time, its effects will begin to apply. Completed
wonders do not prevent you from taking a new
wonder, but they do make it more expensive:
The cost to take a wonder card is increased by 1 civil
action for every wonder you already have built.
So the first wonder you take costs the usual amount
of civil actions. Once you complete it, taking the
next one costs you 1 extra civil action. Taking a third
wonder costs 2 extra civil actions, etc.
Tip: Before you take a wonder card, make sure you
can build it and make sure you want it. There is no
easy way to get rid of an unfinished wonder, and it
can keep you from getting a wonder you need more.
Action Cards
An action card represents good
fortune or an exceptional
effort. Unlike the other civil
cards, an action card will not
have a permanent effect.
It gives you a one-time benefit
when you play it, and then it
goes to the discard pile. If you
take an action card, keep it in
your hand. You may play it on
a later turn.
Action Phase
Now you are set up for your first game. This is what will happen:
The first round is the simplest, but it lays the foundation for all the others.
In the first round, you have a limited number of actions and limited options for using them.
Example of Taking Cards in the First Round
Three players are choosing from these cards:
The starting player has only 1 civil action. He uses it to take the leader Moses into
his hand. Then he performs his End-of-Turn Sequence as explained below.
The second player has 2 civil actions. She takes the Colossus and places it sideways
on the table to show that it is not finished. She decides to use her second civil action
to take the Engineering Genius card, which will allow her to build the Colossus more
quickly. That card goes into her hand. She performs her End-of-Turn Sequence.
The third player has 3 civil actions. He would like to spend 2 civil actions to take
Hammurabi, but what could he do with his third action? Homer and Aristotle are
the only cards available for 1 action, and no player may take more than one Age A
leader. He could take Hammurabi a nyway a nd e nd h is t urn w ith 1 c ivil a ction
unused. If he prefers to take two cards, he could, for example, take Aristotle into
his hand and put the Library of Alexandria into play as an unfinished wonder. Or he
could take one of the cards that costs 3 actions if he saw one he liked more than
Hammurabi. In any case, he ends his turn with the End-of-Turn Sequence, and
then it is time for round two.
Open Civil Cards
All civil cards are taken from the card row and played face up. So each player's
civil cards are known to any player who can keep track of that information.
If you do not want to have this memory aspect in the game, you may agree that
any player must reveal his or her civil cards on request, or even agree to play with
civil cards face up on the table (possibly turned sideways so that it is clear that
they are cards in hand and not cards in play). Even if the cards are public, they are
still considered to be cards in hand until they are played or discarded.
... The First Round
End-of-Turn Sequence
Discard Excess Military Cards
You have no military cards in round one, so you
ignore this step.
Production Phase
There is no risk of an uprising yet, so you will perform
the steps of your Production Phase.
Score Science and Culture
Move your science points counter ahead by a number
of spaces equal to your science rating.
Move your culture points counter ahead by a number
of spaces equal to your culture rating.
Because players can do nothing but take cards in the
first round, they all end their turns with the same
ratings: 1 science and 0 culture. Move your science
points counter ahead 1 space. Your culture points
counter remains on the 0 space.
Note: Your science rating marker (the round one) does
not move. It indicates how many spaces you should
move your science points counter (the octagonal one).
Corruption
There is no risk of corruption in the first round.
Ignore this step.
Food Production
Now each farm will produce food.
For each worker on a farm technology, move a blue
token from your blue bank to that card.
You have two Age A farms (two yellow tokens on
Agriculture) so you take two blue tokens from your
blue bank and put them on your Agriculture card.
The symbol at the bottom of the Agriculture card
indicates that each blue token on this card is worth
1 food. Congratulations! Your civilization is now
storing 2 food.
Food Consumption
Your land is only sparsely populated, so your people
do not eat any of the stored food. Ignore this step in
round one.
Resource Production
This is analogous to food production:
For each worker on a mine technology, move a blue
token from your blue bank to that card.
You move two blue tokens to your Bronze card, which
means you are storing 2 resources. These can be
spent on later turns.
Draw Military Cards
You can draw one military card for each available
military action. In round one, you have no available
military actions, so you can draw no cards. Ignore
this step.
Reset Actions
Put all your white and red tokens on your Despotism
card.
On your next turn, you will have 4 civil actions and
2 military actions available.
Your player board depicts the steps at the end of your turn, but in the first round, only certain steps are relevant.
The Second Round
The rules for your second turn are the same as for all your later turns. However,
because you have no military cards, some options are not yet available to you.
On your second turn:
 Replenish the card row.
 Play your civil and military actions (your Action Phase).
 Perform the End-of-Turn Sequence.
No one replenishes the card row in the first round. But for the rest of the game, this is the way each player will
start his or her turn.
Except during the first round, each player begins his or her turn by replenishing the card row:
 Remove the indicated cards at the front of the card row.
 Slide the remaining cards to the left.
 Deal new civil cards to the empty spaces.
Remove Cards
The number of cards to remove depends on the number of players, as indicated by the notation above the three
leftmost spaces.
 In a 2-player game, remove the cards in the first 3 spaces.
 In a 3-player game, remove the cards in the first 2 spaces.
 In a 4-player game, remove the card in the first space only.
Of course, sometimes one or more of these spaces will already be empty because the previous player took the
card. In that case, the card has already been removed for you; you don't remove a different card instead.
The cards removed do not come back into the game. You can keep the civil card discard pile in the box so that
they do not accidentally get mixed back in.
Slide Cards
The card row now has one or more empty spaces. Slide each card through the empty spaces to the left. When
you are done, all the empty spaces will be together on the far right. The order of the cards will not change. Thus
cards move from more expensive spaces to less expensive spaces.
Deal New Cards
The card row now has several empty spaces, all of them on the right. Deal one card from the current civil deck
to each empty space. When you are done, each space of the card row will have one card.
End of Age AWhen replenishing the card row for the first time,
the cards come from the Age A civil deck. (In the
unlikely event that you run out of Age A civil cards,
fill any remaining empty spaces by dealing from the
Age I civil deck.)
When the card row is replenished for the first time,
Age A ends and Age I begins.
Put the rest of the Age A civil deck in the box. Shuffle
the Age I civil deck and place it on the lighter half of
the current age board. From now on, the card row
will be replenished with Age I civil cards.
Shuffle the Age I military deck and place it on the
darker half of the current age board. Players will
be able to draw from it during their End-of-Turn
Sequences.
Placing Age I decks on the current age board is the
only thing that happens at the end of Age A. Ages I
and II end with additional steps, which will be
discussed later.
Note: The starting player is the one who makes the
transition from Age A to Age I, but for the rest of
the game, there will be nothing special about the
starting player's turn. You always begin your turn
by replenishing the card row, even if you are not the
starting player.
Replenishing The Card Row
On your second turn, you have all your actions at your
disposal: 4 civil actions (white) and 2 military actions
(red). Whenever you spend an action, move a token
of the corresponding color off your government card.
You can use these actions to do various things, listed
here. You may perform your actions in any order,
possibly alternating between civil and military
actions if you wish. Unless otherwise specified, you
may perform the same action as many times as you
can pay for it. You do not have to use all your actions.
Tip: On your second turn, we recommend using only
civil actions. You do not need to build military units
early in this peaceful variant of the game. By leaving
your military actions unused, you will be able to draw
military cards at the end of your turn.
The civil actions you may play are:
 take a card from the card row
 increase population
 build a farm or mine
 build an urban building
 upgrade a farm, mine, or urban building *
 destroy a farm, mine, or urban building *
 play a leader
 build a stage of a wonder
 develop a technology *
 declare a revolution *
 play an action card
Potential military actions:
 build a military unit
 upgrade a military unit *
 disband a military unit *
 play a tactics card **
 copy a tactic **
* It is unlikely that you will perform these actions on
your second turn, but we will describe them here
anyway, in their proper context.
** These actions require military cards, which you
do not have yet. They will be described in the next
chapter.
Note: This list of all possible actions is also on the
quick reference sheet.
Action Phase
A 3-player example is illustrated.
In the second round, you have many choices to make.
... The Second Round ...
Taking a Card
You may take a card from the card row. The rules
are the same as in the first round. In addition to
leaders, wonders, and action cards, you may have an
opportunity to take technology cards.
Technology Cards

Technology cards come in various colors. Each has
a blue number in the upper left corner representing
its science cost.
You may take any technology card by paying t he
number of civil actions specified by the card row.
There is one minor limitation:
You may never take a technology card with the same
name as a technology you already have in your hand
or in play.
When you take the technology, you put it in your
hand. It has no effect until you put it into play, as
explained later.
Civil Cards Hand Limit
The number of civil cards in your hand is limited by
your civil action total  the number of white tokens
you have, whether on or off your government card.
If you are already holding that many civil cards, you
may not put any more in your hand.
Note: This does not prevent you from taking
a wonder. Wonders go directly into play without
entering your hand.
You begin the game with 4 white tokens. So you have
a hand limit of 4 civil cards, regardless of whether
your civil actions are available or spent. You will
not be able to hold more than 4 civil cards until you
increase your number of civil actions.
Tip: Take only cards that you intend to play. There is
no easy way to discard civil cards.
Increasing Your Population
You may choose to increase your population. This
gets you more workers.
To increase your population:
 Pay 1 civil action.
 Pick up the rightmost yellow token in your yellow
bank.
 Pay the amount of food specified by the white
number under that section of the yellow bank.
 Put the yellow token in your worker pool. It is now
an unused worker.
Paying Food
When you increase your population for the first time,
it costs you 2 food, as depicted under the rightmost
section of your yellow bank.
To pay food, move blue tokens representing the
specified amount from your farm technologies to
your blue bank.
This is illustrated below.
You should have 2 blue tokens on your Agriculture card
after the first round. The symbol at the bottom of
the card means that each of those is worth 1 food.
To pay 2 food, move 2 blue tokens from Agriculture to
the blue bank. You cannot pay with the blue tokens on
your Bronze card because they represent resources,
not food.
If you don't have enough food, you can't increase
your population. On your second turn, you usually
don't have enough food to increase your population
more than once.
Do not forget: when paying, you never give up the
blue tokens; you just return them to your blue bank.
Your New Worker
You have moved the rightmost yellow token from
your yellow bank to your worker pool. Now, the token
represents an unused worker. However, you have
one less token in your yellow bank. That means the
population density of your civilization is a bit higher.
You still have one more token in that section of your
yellow bank. So the next population increase will
again cost only 2 food. Once that section is empty,
however, increasing population will cost you 3 food.
Also, removing the last yellow token from that
section will reveal the symbol, which means your
civilization will consume 1 food at the end of your
turn.
As your number of workers increases, your yellow
bank empties. This represents that less land is
available for expansion. It costs more food to
maintain and increase your population. If you ever
empty your yellow bank completely, you will be
unable to increase your population any more. You will
have reached maximum population density.
Another effect of increasing population is represented
by your happiness indicator. There is a reason this is
joined to your yellow bank. Each empty subsection
requires you to produce an additional happy face
if you want to keep your population happy. See the
Happiness and Discontent Workers section on page 19.
Pay 2 food to increase your population.
... The Second Round ... Building a New Farm or Mine
Unused workers can be put to work. Building a new
farm or mine may be a good idea. This increases your
food or resource production.
To build a new farm or mine, do the following:
 Pay 1 Civil Action.
 Pay the resource cost depicted on one of the farm
or mine (brown) technology cards you have in
play.
 Move one of your unused workers to that farm or
mine technology card.
Paying Resources
Paying resources works the same way as paying food.
To pay resources, move blue tokens representing the
specified amount from your mine technologies to
your blue bank.
An Age A farm or mine costs 2 resources, as specified
by the Agriculture or Bronze card. Your Bronze card
has 2 blue tokens from your first turn's production.
Each is worth 1 resource, as specified by the
symbol at the bottom of the card. You can afford to
build either a farm or a mine. The tokens go to your
blue bank.
If you can't pay the cost, you can't do the action.
Pay 2 resources to build a new mine.
Your New Farm or Mine
When the worker is placed on Agriculture or Bronze,
the worker becomes an Age A farm or mine. This has
no immediate effect, but at the end of your turn, the
card will get one more blue token than it would have
otherwise. Your production will be higher.
Once you develop better farm or mine technologies,
you may build better farms or mines. But you may
continue to build Age A farms and mines, if you wish.
Building an Urban Building
Urban buildings are built the
same way farms and mines are:
 Pay 1 civil action.
 Pay the resource cost
depicted on one of the urban
building (gray) technology
cards you have in play.
 Move an unused worker
to that urban building
technology card.
 Update your ratings. (See
the Updating Your Statistics
box on the facing page.)
Urban buildings on Philosophy
or Religion have a resource cost
of 3. You have only 2 resources,
so you will probably not be able
to build an urban building on
your second turn, unless you
have help from an action card.
(Action cards are explained later.)
Your New Urban Building
Each worker on an urban building technology card
represents one building of the corresponding type
and level. At the start of the game, you have only two
such technologies  you may build level 0 labs
and level 0 temples. Later, you may develop higher
level labs and temples, as well as other types of
urban buildings such as libraries, theaters,
and arenas. All are built according to the same
rules.
The symbols at the bottom of the urban building
technology card depict the contribution of each
building  that is, of each worker on the card.
As soon as you build an urban building, you need
to update your ratings, as explained in the Updating
Your Statistics box.
Example: If you build a second lab, then it will also
produce 1 per turn. Move your science rating
marker to the +2 space. Your science rating is now 2.
If you build a temple, your culture rating and
happiness rating increase to 1. If you build a second
temple, both ratings increase to 2.
Urban Building Limit
The number in the bottom
right corner of your
government card is your urban
building limit. It specifies how
many cities your civilization
can support, which is
represented by how many
buildings of each type you
have.
The urban building limit printed on your government
card specifies the maximum number of buildings you
may have of one type.
An urban building's type is specified by the icon in
the upper right corner of the card it is on. The urban
building limit applies to all buildings of the same
type regardless of level.
You may build one more lab, but then you are
at your limit  Despotism has an urban building
limit of 2. You cannot build a third lab (even if you
develop a better lab technology) until you change to
a government with a higher limit. However, you may
build up to two temples regardless of how many labs
you have.
You may build any number of farms or mines.
The urban building limit does not apply to them.
Building a Military Unit
Because your first game is less militaristic, you
probably don't want to build a military unit on your
second turn. But you can if you want to. Building
a military unit works the same as building an urban
building except you pay a military action instead of
a civil action.
 Pay 1 military action.
 Pay the resource cost
depicted on one of
the military unit (red)
technology cards you have
in play.
 Move an unused worker to
that military unit technology
card.
 Update your strength rating. (See the Updating
Your Statistics box on the facing page.)
Note: The resource cost is printed on a red
background to remind you that building a military
unit is a military action, not a civil action.
Your Military Units
Each military unit contributes to your strength rating
by the value depicted on the card. Thus if you build
another unit on your Warriors card, your strength
rating increases by 1.
There is no limit to the number of military units of
each type you may have.
Playing a Leader
A leader in your hand has no effect until you put it
in play.
To play a leader when you have no leader in play:
 Pay 1 civil action.
 Put the leader on the table next to your player
board.
 Update your statistics, if necessary. (See the
Updating Your Statistics box on the facing page.)
You may take a leader and put it into play on the same
turn. Just remember to pay the actions for taking it
and the action for putting it into play.
Your Leader's Effect
Once the leader enters play, his or her effect
immediately begins to apply. Some leaders have
symbols on the bottom of the card that affect your
statistics.
The text on the card describes effects that may give
you special options and privileges.
Examples:
Caesar gives you an extra
military action and increases
your strength rating b y 1 .
He also gives you a new option
in the Politics Phase, which we
will explain later.
Moses does not change your
statistics, but he adjusts the
rules for how you increase your
population.
Some leaders are explained in more detail in the
Appendix on the back page of the Code of Laws.
... The Second Round ...
Replacing a Leader
If you already have a leader, he or she automatically
retires and leaves play when you play a new one.
The old leader's effect ceases to apply. The new
leader's effect applies instead. As a sign of support
from the retiring leader, you gain one civil action
back.
To replace your leader:
 Pay 1 civil action.
 Remove the previous leader from play.
 Put the new leader in play.
 Update your statistics, if necessary. (Do not forget
to subtract the effect of the previous leader.)
 Gain 1 civil action back (move it back onto your
government card).
You are allowed to use the benefit of a leader and then
replace him or her on the same turn.
Note: Paying the action then gaining it back does not
mean you can replace your leader for free. If you have
no available civil actions, you cannot replace your
leader.
Example: You have Moses as your leader. On your
turn, you increase your population for one civil action
(with the discount Moses provides), then take an
Age I leader from the middle section of the card row
for two actions, and then play that leader for your last
civil action. Moses leaves play and you get one civil
action back, for whatever you want to do next.
If you had increased your population twice before
taking the Age I leader, you would be unable to
replace Moses t his turn b ecause y ou w ould h ave n o
civil actions left.
Summary  Leaders
 Once you have taken a leader from the card row,
you may never take another leader from that age.
 Playing the leader costs 1 civil action. If you
already have a leader in play, the old leader is
automatically removed from play and you get 1
civil action back.
 A leader's effect applies while it is in play.
Building a Wonder
A wonder enters play turned sideways to indicate it is
unfinished. Each wonder card has a row of numbers
at the bottom of the illustration. Each numeral
represents one stage of the wonder, and the value is
the resource cost of that stage.
Example: The pyramids are
built in three stages. The first
stage costs 3 resources, the
second stage costs 2 resources,
and the final stage costs
1 resource.
To build a stage of an unfinished wonder:
 Pay 1 civil action.
 Pay the resource cost of the leftmost uncovered
stage.
 Take a blue token from your blue bank and use it
to cover up that numeral to indicate you have built
that stage.
You may build multiple stages of a wonder on the
same turn, if you have enough resources and civil
actions. You may build stages even if you took the
wonder from the card row this turn.
The blue tokens on your wonder do not represent
food or resources. They just mark the progress of
construction.
Completing a Wonder
If your build the last stage of a wonder, the wonder
is completed:
 Return all blue tokens from the card to your blue
bank.
 Straighten the card to indicate that it is completed.
 Update your statistics, if necessary. (See the
Updating Your Statistics box.)
When a wonder is completed, any effect printed
on it begins to apply, and you adjust your statistics
according to the symbols printed at the bottom of the
card.
Note: Unlike farms, mines, urban buildings, and
military units, a wonder does not need and cannot
have a worker on it.
Example: You spend your last civil action to build the
final stage of the Pyramids. The Pyramids' effect is to
give you an additional civil action. Take a white token
from the box and put it on your government card.
You may spend it this turn and in all future turns.
Some wonders are explained in more detail in the
Appendix on the back page of the Code of Laws.
Summary  Wonders
 A wonder enters play unfinished as soon as you
take it from the card row. Its effects do not apply
while it is unfinished.
 You may not take a wonder from the card row if
you already have an unfinished wonder in play.
 Wonders are built in stages. Each stage requires
a civil action and resources.
 A wonder's effects apply once it is completed.
 When you take a new wonder from the card row,
you must pay 1 additional civil action for each
wonder you have already completed.
Your civilization's statistics depend on the cards you
have in play and the locations of your workers. Cards
that affect your statistics usually have symbols at the
bottom. There are two types:
 Urban building technologies and military unit
technologies have no effect when they first
enter play. They require workers. Each worker
contributes the amount depicted at the bottom of
the card. If there is one worker on the card, the
effect is applied once. If there are two workers, it
is applied twice, etc. If the card has no workers, it
has no effect on your statistics.
 Other cards (special technologies, governments,
leaders, completed wonders, etc.) do not need and
cannot have workers on them. The depicted effect
applies as soon as they enter play (or as soon
as they are completed, in the case of wonders).
The effect always applies exactly once.
Note: An effect may be depicted with numerals ( )
or with a repeated symbol ( ). The meaning is
the same (a contribution of 2 to the corresponding
rating).
Ratings
Your ratings are the 4 statistics tracked by your rating
indicators. Your ratings are completely determined
by the cards and workers you have in play. The rating
indicators simply keep track of your totals so you do
not have to recalculate every time you want to know
how much you have.
If a card requires workers, your ratings can change
when you move a worker on or off the card. If a card
does not require workers, your ratings can change
when the card enters or leaves play. Whenever your
ratings change, update your indicators immediately.
Note: Some cards, especially leaders, contribute to
your ratings based on other cards in play. And some
cards alter the way other cards contribute to your
ratings.
Limits on Ratings
None of your ratings can ever go below zero. If the
total contribution of your cards and workers is
negative (not likely, but theoretically possible) then
your rating is 0.
Your happiness rating cannot go above 8. If your
cards and workers produce more than this, your
civilization has 8 happy faces.
Your science, culture, and
strength ratings have no
maximum. If your rating
exceeds the maximum depicted by the indicator, flip
your marker over to the other side and start counting
again from zero. For example, a flipped-over science
rating marker on space 5 represents a science rating
of 30.
Colonization Modifier
Some cards in play may give your civilization
a colonization modifier. This symbol is on very few
cards and it applies only during colonization, which
is explained later. It has no indicator because it is
easy to calculate when you need it.
Action Totals
Your civil action total is represented by the number
of white tokens you have. Your military action total
is represented by your red tokens. Your government
card makes the biggest contribution to your action
totals, but other cards may have or symbols
at the bottom to indicate that they contribute as well.
When such a card enters play, leaves play, or is
replaced by a new card, your action totals may
change:
 If an action total increases, take the corresponding
number of white or red tokens from the box and
put them on your government card. They are
available.
 If an action total decreases, return the
corresponding number of white or red tokens to
the box. Return spent actions first.
Updating Your Statistics
... The Second Round ... Developing a Technology
Technology cards you take from the card row have no
effect until you put them into play.
To develop a technology:
 Pay 1 civil action.
 Pay the science cost depicted in the upper left
corner of the technology card.
 Put the technology into play.
The effect of putting a technology into play, if any,
depends on the card, as will be explained later.
When the rules and cards refer to your technologies,
they are referring only to those technology cards you
have in play.
Paying Science Points
To pay the science cost, move your octagonal science
points counter that many spaces back on the science
points track. If you do not have enough science
points, you cannot develop the technology.
On your second turn, you will probably be unable
to develop any technology because you have only
1 science point.
Farm or Mine Technologies (Brown)
When you develop a new farm or mine
technology, put it above your e xisting t echnology o f
the same type. The cards may overlap, but don't cover
the resource cost of the lower level card.
The newly developed technology does not represent
a farm or mine, just your knowledge of advanced
techniques. It does not produce anything until you
put workers on it. You can build a new farm or mine
on this card if you pay the corresponding resource
cost. You still have the ability to build lower level
farms and mines.
It is also possible to upgrade lower level farms and
mines to a higher level, as will be explained later.
Urban Building Tech nologies (Gray)
When you develop a new urban building technology,
check its type, as represented by the icon in the upper
right corner. If you already have a technology of this
type, put the higher level one above the lower level
one. If it is a new type, place it in its own column next
to your other urban building technologies.
The new urban building technology has no effect
until you put a worker on it. You can do this by
building a new building or by upgrading an existing
building, as explained later.
Military Unit Technologies (Red)
When you develop a new military unit technology,
check its type. If you already have a technology of this
type, put the higher level one above the lower level
one. If it is a new type of military unit technology,
place it in its own column next to the others.
The new military unit technology has no effect until
you put a worker on it. You can do this by building or
upgrading a military unit.
Note: The science cost is printed on a white
background to remind you that developing the
technology requires a civil action. The resource cost
is on a red background to remind you that building,
upgrading, or disbanding a military unit costs one
military action.
Special Technologies (Blue)
Special technologies represent specialized knowledge
that benefits your civilization without requiring you
to build anything. They follow special rules:
 A special technology's effect applies as soon as it
is developed. It does not require (and cannot have)
workers.
 You cannot have two special technologies of the
same type. If you develop a new technology with
the same icon in the upper right corner, the higher
level technology stays in play and the one with the
lower level is removed.
Some special technologies increase your
strength rating and colonization bonus. Some give
you extra civil and military actions, or even blue
tokens. When you develop one of these, you update
your statistics. (See the Updating Your Statistics box on
the previous page.)
Construction technologies do
not adjust your statistics, but they
make your urban buildings less
expensive. If you are building an
urban building, its resource cost is
lower by the amount specified on
the construction technology card.
(The cost adjustment depends on
the age of that building's
technology card.)
Construction technologies also allow you to build
multiple stages of a wonder for one civil action, if you
have enough resources to do so. You pay the sum of
the costs all at once, then move the corresponding
number of blue tokens from your blue bank to the
wonder card.
Governments (Orange)
There are two ways to develop a government
technology. We explain them both in the next section.
Changing Governments
Your civilization always has
exactly one government in
play, represented by an orange
technology card. You begin
with Despotism, the government
printed on your player board.
Later, you may replace it with
better governments. Advanced
governments give you more
civil and/or military actions
and increase your urban
building limit. Some governments also affect your
ratings.
There are two ways to change your government:
peaceful change or revolution. Both ways count as
"developing a technology" and both have a science
point cost. However, their costs are different. That is
why governments have two science point costs in the
upper left corner.
Peaceful Change of Government
You may change your government through natural
evolution. As a society grows and becomes more
enlightened, their government can change to reflect
the new social consciousness. Peaceful change costs
more science points, but your citizens barely notice
what is happening. A peaceful change of government
works like developing any other technology.
To change your government
peacefully:
 Pay 1 civil action.
 Pay the higher science cost
depicted in the upper left corner
of the technology card.
 Put your government in play, replacing the
previous government.
 Update your statistics (especially your number of
civil and military actions).
Cover the previous government with the new card.
The previous government is thus removed from play
(although in the case of Despotism, it is still physically
part of your player board). Any unspent actions that
were on the previous government are moved onto the
new government.
If your new government offers more civil or military
actions than the old one, you take new white or red
tokens from the box to reflect your new total, as
explained in the Updating Your Statistics box on page
1 1. These new actions are available for use this turn.
Example: When developing
Theocracy, you pay 1 civil
action and 6 science points.
You cover your Despotism card
with Theocracy, moving any
available actions onto the new
card. You get no extra white
token (Theocracy provides the
same amount of civil actions
as Despotism) but you get 1 new
red token and put it on the
Theocracy card. It is available. Also, you increase your
ratings by 1 culture, 1 strength, and 1 happy face.
... The Second Round ...
Declaring a Revolution
Changing your government through revolution
costs less science, but it paralyzes your civilization
for one turn. You spend all your civil actions in the
revolution.
To declare a revolution:
 Pay all your civil actions.
You cannot declare a revolution if
any of your civil actions is spent.
 Pay the lower science cost.
 Put the government in play, replacing the previous
government.
 Update your statistics (especially the number of
civil and military actions).
 If you gain any new civil actions, spend them
without effect.
You must use up all your civil actions for a turn to
declare a revolution. You cannot spend any civil
actions before the revolution (unless you spend an
action and get it back  say, by replacing a leader).
This means you won't be able to take a government
technology from the card row and declare a revolution
on the same turn.
The middle steps are the same as a peaceful change
of government. The big difference is that you will end
with all your civil actions spent, including any t hat
you gained from the revolution.
Your military actions are not affected. You may spend
any of them before or after the revolution, and any
that you gain from the new government will be
available to spend.
Example: To declare a revolution
to Monarchy, you spend
all four civil actions (so it
will probably be t he only civil
action you do this turn) and pay
2 science. You take 1 new white
and 1 new red token. The red
token goes on the Monarchy
card, as do any unspent
military actions you had before
the revolution. The white token
ends up beside the government card. It is spent as
part of the revolution.
Summary  Technologies
 Technologies are cards. Six of these cards are
preprinted on your player board. The others must
be developed.
 When you take a technology from the card row it
goes into your hand, where it has no effect.
 You are not allowed to take a technology with
the same name as one you have in play or in your
hand.
 You put a technology into play with a "develop"
action. This costs one civil action and a certain
number of science points.
 Most technology cards do nothing until they
have workers. See Summary  Workers on page 14.
You may have multiple levels of such technologies,
even if they are the same type.
 Special technologies, the blue ones, cannot have
workers. They take effect as soon as they enter
play.
 Each special technology has a type icon in the
upper right corner. You never have two of the same
type in play. The lower level one is automatically
removed from play.
 A new government always replaces the old
government in play, regardless of their levels.
 Declaring a revolution is also developing
a technology, but the rules are somewhat more
complex.
Upgrading a Farm or Mine
You will not get a chance to upgrade your farms
or mines on your second turn, but the action is
theoretically available to you on all turns after the
first. As was stated earlier, if you have a higher level
farm or mine technology you can either build a farm
or mine on it directly, or you can upgrade one that
you already have.
To upgrade one of your existing farms (or mines) to
a higher level:
 Pay 1 civil action.
 Choose a farm (or mine) and a farm (or mine)
technology card of a higher level.
 Pay resources equal to the difference between the
resource costs.
 Move the worker from the lower level card to the
higher level card.
Example:
Later in the game, your technologies may look like
this. For 1 civil action, you may:
 upgrade one Age A farm to an Age II farm for
4 resources;
 upgrade your Age A mine to an Age I mine for
3 resources;
 upgrade one Age I mine to an Age II mine for
3 resources;
 or upgrade your Age A mine to an Age II mine
for 6 resources. (You can skip over the card in
between.)
If you have an unused worker, you may also build
a new farm or mine of any level. (Except for an Age II
mine  as we will see, you do not have 8 resources.)
Higher Level Farms and Mines
Higher level farm and mine technology cards follow
the same rules as those from Age A. The difference is
that a blue token on a higher level card is worth more.
During the Production Phase, each worker on the card
produces only 1 blue token, but the token is worth the
value printed at the bottom of the card. For example,
1 blue token on Coal counts as 3 resources.
In the illustration above, you have 6 resources. During
your Production Phase, you will produce 5 more
resources  two blue tokens on your Age I card and
one on your Age A card.
Paying Food and Resources
When you pay food or resources, returning a blue
token to the bank counts as paying the amount
depicted at the bottom of the card.
Example: In the previous example, if you need to
pay 2 , you may do so either by returning one blue
token from the Age I card, or by returning two blue
tokens from the Age A card.
When paying, you may (and sometimes must)
exchange a blue token of higher value for one or more
tokens of the same or lesser total value.
Example:
Suppose you need to pay 1 food. You have no token
worth 1 , but you do have tokens worth 2 .
You may move one of these to your blue bank, then
move 2 blue tokens from your blue bank to your Age
A card. Now it is possible to pay exactly 1 .
Of course, you do not need to move so many tokens
around. You can move one blue token from Irrigation
to your Age A card. Your civilization's stored food has
dropped from 4 to 3. Thus you have paid 1 .
Note: It is possible to have blue tokens on a farm or
mine technology card even if the card has no workers.
Now suppose you need to pay 1 resource. You can
remove 1 blue token from Coal and put 3 on Bronze,
then pay with one of those. In practice, you pay the
cost by moving 1 blue token from Coal to Bronze
(paying 2) and then moving 1 blue token from your
blue bank to Bronze ( getting b ack 1 resource in
change). Either way, 1 token on Coal becomes 2 on
Bronze for a net payment of 1 .
To pay 4 resources, you may pay 3 with one token
and then use the above exchange to pay 1 more, or
you can slide both tokens from Coal to Bronze, paying
2 plus 2. Either way, the result is the same: no tokens
on Coal and 2 on Bronze, representing a total payment
of 4 .
Exchanging only works in one direction  from
a higher value to a lower value.
You may never exchange tokens of a lower value for
tokens of a higher value.
For example, you cannot move 2 blue tokens from
Agriculture to your blue bank and put 1 on Irrigation.
... The Second Round ...
Upgrading an Urban Building
If you have two urban building technologies of the
same type (defined by the icon in the upper right
corner) you may upgrade a lower level building to
one of higher level by paying the difference between
the costs:
To upgrade one of your urban buildings:
 Pay 1 civil action.
 Choose an urban building and an urban building
technology card of the same type and higher level.
 Pay resources equal to the difference between the
resource costs.
 Move the worker from the lower level card to the
higher level card.
 Update your ratings.
Example:
For 1 civil action, you may:
 upgrade your Age A lab to an Age I lab (for
3 resources) and increase your science rating by 1;
 upgrade your Age A lab to an Age II lab (for
5 resources) and increase your science rating by 2;
 upgrade your Age I lab to an Age II lab (for
2 resources) and increase your science rating by 1;
 or upgrade your Age I arena to an Age II arena (for
2 resources) and increase your strength rating
and happiness rating by 1.
If you have an unused worker and enough resources,
you may also build a new temple or arena of any level.
But don't forget: if you still have Despotism as your
government, you are limited to 2 buildings of each
type. In that case, you can upgrade labs, but you can't
build new ones.
Construction Technologies and
Upgrading Urban Buildings
Special (blue) technologies with this icon modify
the cost of urban buildings when you are building
or upgrading. Sometimes this makes upgrading
cheaper, but not always. When calculating the
difference between resource costs, apply the card's
modifiers to both costs:
Example: If you have Masonry
in play, buildings of Ages I and
II cost 1 less. An Age I lab costs
5, but an Age A lab still costs 3.
So you pay only 2 to upgrade
from Age A to Age I. In this
case, the card makes upgrading
cheaper. However, upgrading
from Age I to Age II costs the
same as it would without
Masonry. Both levels have the
same discount.
Upgrading a Military Unit
This is analogous to upgrading an urban building,
except that it costs 1 military action instead of a civil
action.
To upgrade one of your military units:
 Pay 1 military action.
 Choose a military unit and a military unit
technology card of the same type and higher level.
 Pay resources equal to the difference between the
resource costs.
 Move the worker from the lower level card to the
higher level card.
 Update your strength rating.
Note: As with farms, mines, and urban buildings, the
type depicted in the upper right corner is important.
You can upgrade warriors to higher level infantry
units, but not to cavalry or artillery.
Destroying a Farm, Mine,
or Urban Building
This is usually not a good idea, but in some
circumstances, it might be your only way to get an
unused worker.
To destroy a farm, mine, or urban building:
 Pay 1 civil action.
 Move one of your workers from the chosen brown
or gray technology card to the worker pool.
That's it. You do not get any resources back.
Disbanding a Military unit
This is like destroying a farm, mine, or urban
building, except you pay a military action instead of
a civil action:
To disband one of your military units:
 Pay 1 military action.
 Move one worker from the chosen military unit
technology card to the worker pool.
Summary  Workers
 A worker is a yellow token in your play area, but
not in your yellow bank.
 A worker that is not on a card is an unused worker.
 A worker on a technology card is a farm or mine,
an urban building, or a military unit. It has the
same level and type as the card.
 You can move an unused worker to a card with
a "build" action. You pay a resource cost.
 You can move a worker from a lower level card
to a higher level card with an "upgrade" action.
You pay the difference between the two resource
costs.
 You can remove a worker from a card with
a "destroy" or "disband" action. It becomes an
unused worker.
 Farms, mines, and urban buildings are built,
upgraded, or destroyed for 1 civil action, military
units for 1 military action.
 The number of urban buildings of one type
is limited by the urban building limit of your
government card. Farms, mines, and military
units are not limited in this way.
Playing an Action Card
Unlike the other cards we have discussed so far,
action cards do not enter play. You play them, and
they have a one-time effect.
An action card cannot be played during the same
Action Phase in which it was taken.
Thematically, the action cards represent your
civilization's preparation for future tasks. From
a game-flow standpoint, t his delay between taking
an action card and using it makes it easier to plan
your next turn. While others are playing, you already
know what food and resources you will have and you
know which action cards you will be able to use. Your
next turn will not be heavily influenced by whether
a certain action card is available in the card row.
To play an action card:
 Pay 1 civil action.
 Follow the text. If the effect requires you to
perform an action, you do so without paying an
additional civil action.
 Discard the action card. It will not enter the game
again.
Let's take a look at the effects a card can have:
Scoring Science and/or Culture
Move your octagonal counters
ahead the corresponding number of
spaces. (You are scoring points.
This does not affect your ratings
indicators.)
Gaining Food and/or Resources
When you gain food, move blue
tokens from your blue bank to your
farm technology cards to represent
the amount gained. For example,
you can gain 2 food by moving
1 token to Irrigation or 2 tokens to
Agriculture. You may move blue
tokens even onto cards that have no
workers.
Gaining resources is analogous.
When gaining food or resources, you are not allowed
to move tokens off cards. For example, if you have
Bronze (tokens are worth 1) and Coal ( tokens a re
worth 3), you gain 2 resources by moving 2 tokens
from your blue bank to Bronze. You can't move a token
from Bronze to Coal. You can't put a new token on Coal
and then take back one from Bronze.
Performing an Action with a Discount
If the card specifies that you
perform one of the actions normally
available to you in your Action
Phase, you perform it according to
the usual rules, except you do not
pay its civil action cost. You already
paid for it when you played the
action card.
You still pay the resource cost,
but these cards specify a discount,
which is cumulative with any other
discounts you may have from cards
in play. If this discount would
reduce your cost below 0, your
resource cost is 0.
Note: Engineering Genius only
allows you to build one stage of a wonder, even if you
have a technology that would allow you to build more
for one civil action.
If for any reason you cannot perform the specified
action, then you cannot play the action card.
... The Second Round
Through the Ages is a complex game. It is not easy to plan your actions perfectly
in your head. You may need to try a few actions before you can tell whether your
Action Phase will end well. If it looks like your Action Phase is going badly, you
should be allowed to take back your actions and try a different approach. Of course
you don't want to overdo it. Taking back too many actions slows down the game,
and it can be difficult to undo things once you have moved a lot of tokens around.
Tracking Actions
Instead of placing spent action tokens next to your government card, you can
place them at the location where you performed that action. If you increase your
population, you can denote this with a white token in your worker pool. If you
build or upgrade something, put the token next to the worker you moved so you
can remember which one it was. When you take a card from the card row, you can
put the tokens you spent on that space. And if you play a technology, you can put
a white token on it ... unless it's a government, of course.
This bookkeeping trick makes it easy to see what you have done this turn, which
makes it easier to take back actions if you need to.
When you reset your actions at the end of your turn, collect all your white and red
tokens and return them to your government card.
Your End-of-Turn Sequence on your second turn will probably be similar to your
first turn, except you will now have a chance to draw military cards. Just follow
the steps in the order shown on your player board.
You will not discard military cards, and you will not have an uprising. Corruption
and consumption are unlikely, so we will explain them in the next chapter.
You will score 1 science point for your lab, or perhaps 2 if you built a second lab.
If you built a temple, you will score 1 culture point.
You will produce food and resources. This will be more than last turn if you built
a farm or mine.
Drawing Military Cards
After your Production Phase, draw 1 military card from the current military deck
for each of your remaining available military actions.
You had 2 military actions. If you did not spend any of them on building or
disbanding u nits, you w ill d raw 2 military cards from the Age I military deck.
Keep them in your hand and do not show them to anyone. Military cards are kept
secret.
Taking Back Actions
Recommended Player Area Layout
End-of-Turn Sequence
Performing an Action, then Gaining a Benefit
These cards also specify that you perform an
action. You perform the action according to the
usual rules, except you do not pay the civil
action cost. The card offers no discount, so you
must pay the entire food cost or science point
cost. Once you have completed the action, you
gain the reward.
If you cannot perform the action, then you
cannot play the card.
Special Case: Breakthrough can be also used to declare a revolution. In that case,
you pay all your civil actions for the revolution instead of paying 1 for Breakthrough.
You may do this only when all your civil actions are available.
Resources for Military Units and a Military Action
This card's effect lasts until the end of your turn. You do not get
the resources physically. Just remember how many you have.
When you pay a resource cost for building or upgrading
a military unit, use these temporary resources first. If they are
more than you need to cover the cost, then you may save the
remainder for building or upgrading other units this turn.
Temporary resources that are still unused at the end of the turn
are lost.
Similarly, the temporary extra military action is not represented by a red token.
You just remember you have it. It is used instead of a red token the first time you
spend a military action. If you do not use it during your Action Phase, it may be
used to draw a military card at the end of your turn (which will be explained soon).
In any case, it cannot be carried over to a later turn.

Military Cards
In your first game, the military cards you draw will
fall into three categories.
Cards marked with
a crown in the upper
left corner are played as
a political action. They
allow you to influence
global affairs. In your
first game, you will have only events and territories.
In the full game, you may also use your political
action to play aggressions, wars, or pacts.
The red cards depicting
sets of military unit icons
are tactics cards. They
can be played during your
Action Phase.
Military bonus cards can
help you when you are
colonizing new territories.
In the full game, the
upper part of the card can
be used to defend against
aggressions.
YOUR FULL TURN:
Your full turn follows these steps in order:
 Replenish the card row.
 Make your exclusive tactic available, if you have
one.
 Politics Phase: Play at most one political action.
 Action Phase: Play your civil and military actions.
 End-of-Turn Sequence: Follow the sequence
printed on your player board. This includes your
Production Phase.
Your political action is played after you have
replenished the card row, but before your Action
Phase. You do not have to play a political action.
In your Politics Phase, you may play at most one
political action.
Political actions include playing aggressions, pacts,
and wars. None of these are in the decks for your first
game. Your only possible political action is to prepare
an event, which you can do only if you have an event
or territory card.
Preparing an Event
Event and territory cards are not played directly from
your hand. Instead, they are placed face down on the
future events deck. The event is known only to the
player who prepared it.
As the game progresses, the future events deck
becomes the current events deck. A current event
takes effect when it is revealed.
To prepare an event:
 Choose a green military card with the symbol
in the upper right corner from your hand.
 Place that card on the future events space, face
down, without showing it to anyone.
 Score culture equal to the level of the card.
 Reveal the top card of the current events deck and
evaluate it.
future events current events past events
The first player who prepares an event will put
the card on the empty future events space. It thus
becomes the future events deck. The player scores
1 culture point (assuming it is an Age I card). Then
the player reveals the top current event, which is one
of the Age A events placed there during setup.
The second player who prepares an event will put
it atop the card on the future events space, score
culture, and reveal the next current event.
When the last card of the current events deck is
revealed and evaluated, the future events deck is
shuffled and put on the current events space, thus
becoming the new current events deck.
After that, the next player to prepare an event places
it on the now-empty space and reveals the top current
event. This time it is one of the events that a player
prepared on an earlier turn. If you prepare events,
then you can plan your strategy to take advantage of
them, although you cannot be certain exactly when
they will be revealed.
As the game progresses, events from different ages
may be put in the same future events deck.
When the future events deck becomes the current
events deck, it should also be sorted so that cards
from earlier ages will be revealed before those from
later ages. Shuffle it as usual, then sort the deck face
down.
Revealing a Current Event
A current event is revealed whenever a player uses
his or her political action to prepare a future event.
The current event is evaluated immediately, before
that player continues his or her turn.
Events with "Territory" in the name are territories
that can be colonized, as explained on the facing
page. Otherwise, follow the text.
To evaluate a non-territory event:
 Follow the text on the card.
 Then put the card face up on the past events space.
Cards in the past events pile will not enter the game
again.
Age A Events
The first several events were
prepared during setup. These
are all positive, and all players
may benefit from them. If the
event requires players to make
a decision, they do so in order,
starting with the one who is
currently playing his or her
turn.
If the event specifies an action
that you would normally perform during your Action
Phase, you perform that action according to the usual
rules, except that you pay no actions for it. If it allows
you to build something for free, then you also pay no
resource cost.
Tip: Some events are beneficial only if you have an
unused worker. It is a good idea to have an unused
worker at the start of round three.
If an event says you may "increase" your population,
that means you must follow the rules for the action
and pay the food cost. If an event says you simply
"gain 1 population" then you just move a yellow
token from your yellow bank to your worker pool
without paying any costs.
Age I and II Events
Once all the Age A events are evaluated, the events
prepared by players start to appear. These may be
positive, negative, or both. Some of these events may
affect only certain players.
Comparing Statistics
If an event talks about the strongest, the two
strongest, the weakest, or the two weakest
civilizations, you compare their strength ratings.
In case of a tie, the player whose turn it is, or the
player who is closer to that player in turn order, is
considered to have more.
To help you remember this rule, consider this:
The player currently taking a turn is in position to
increase his or her strength first. So that player has
the strongest position. The player whose turn just
ended could have increased strength, but didn't, so
that player is weakest.
Tip: Many events help the strongest players, punish
the weakest players, or both. It is not a bad idea to
end your turn with higher strength than the other
players. This may lead to a cold war even in a game
with no direct attacks.
The same tie-breaker applies when deciding who has
the most culture points. However, having the most
culture points is sometimes a disadvantage.
Also, there is a special rule for a two-player game:
If a card refers to the two strongest or two weakest
players, read it as "the stronger player" or "the
weaker player" in a two-player game.
Not all comparisons require tie-breakers:
If an effect applies to "all civilizations" with the
most of something, then all civilizations tied for the
most are affected. You do not break ties.
Other Effects
As with Age A events, you do not pay actions when
resolving a card's effect unless the effect says
otherwise.
Some effects are explained on your quick reference
sheet. Certain cards are explained in the Appendix at
the back of the Code of Laws.
Politics Phase
Subsequent Rounds
You started your second turn with no military cards, but you probably drew some at the end.
Now it's time to find out what you can do with them.
... Subsequent Rounds ...
Colonization
When a territory is revealed as
the current event, all players
may compete to see who
colonizes it. Players bid to see
who is willing to send the
strongest colonization force.
The player who wins the
auction sends colonists and
takes the colony.
The Auction
Bidding begins with the player who is currently
resolving his or her Politics Phase and proceeds
clockwise around the table. In turn, each player may
bid or drop out.
To make a bid, you need to say a whole number higher
than 0 and higher than any previous bid. You cannot
bid more than the maximum colonization force you
can send. (This will be explained later.)
If you do not bid, then you must pass and drop out of
the bidding.
The possible outcomes of the auction are:
 If no one bids, the territory card goes to the past
events pile. The current event has been resolved.
 Otherwise, bidding continues around the table as
many times as necessary until all but one player
has dropped out. That player wins the auction and
must form a colonization force equal to or greater
than his or her last bid (the highest bid).
Sending a Colonization Force
If you win the auction, you must colonize the
territory. It is too late to change your mind.
To colonize a territory, you must send one or more
military units.
The strength of these units forms
the basis of your colonization
force. You might also have cards
in play that give you a colonization
modifier, represented by the
symbol. You can augment your
force by playing military bonus
cards. The colonization value in the
bottom half of the card is added to
your total.
To calculate your colonization force:
 Count the strength of all the units you have sent.
 If some of these units can be formed into armies,
add the armies' tactical strength. (Explained
later.)
 Add any modifiers you have from cards in
play.
 You may play any number of military bonus cards
and add their colonization value to the total.
Effects that modify your strength rating do not apply
to your colonization force. For example, Alexander the
Great, the Great Wall, and the Warfare technology have
no effect on colonization.
You must always send at least one unit, even if the
modifiers and bonuses alone would be enough to
cover your bid.
Note: Arenas are urban buildings, not military
units. Even though they are workers that contribute
to your strength rating, they cannot be sent with
your colonization force.
Units sent as part of a colonization force are sacrificed
 that is, their yellow tokens are removed from their
cards and returned to your yellow bank.
Any military bonus cards you play are discarded.
Example:
You won the auction with a bid of 4. You must send
a colonization force of 4 or more. Cartography gives
your civilization a +2 colonization modifier, so you
only need to come up with 2 more. The two bonus
cards would give you 2 more, but you are required to
send at least one unit.
You could keep both bonus cards and get to 4 by
sending either two warriors or one knight. But
military units are hard to come by.
You decide the best course of action is to send 1 warrior
and play one +1 bonus card. With the +2 modifier from
Cartography, this adds up to a force that matches your
bid. You remove a yellow token from your Warriors
card and return it to your yellow bank. You reveal and
discard one bonus card. The territory becomes your
new colony.
Gaining a Colony
You put the territory card you won in your play area.
From now on, it is referred to as your colony. Each
territory card has two effects.
The symbols printed at the bottom of the card are
the colony's permanent effects. They may affect your
statistics as explained in the Updating Your Statistics
box on page 11. If yellow or blue tokens are depicted,
see the Gaining and Losing Yellow and Blue Tokens box
on this page.
The effect depicted below the card's name is an
immediate benefit for the player who colonizes the
new territory. When you win the territory, apply the
permanent effect first, and then take this immediate
benefit. It may give you food, resources, science,
culture, or military cards. It may even let you gain
population for free.
In rare circumstances, you might lose your colony.
If you do, you lose its permanent effect, but you do
not undo the immediate benefit. That part of the card
applies only when the territory is first colonized.
Example: When you win this
territory, you add three yellow
tokens from the box to your yellow
bank. Then, you immediately move
two of those tokens to your worker
pool. This does not cost food or
actions.
Later, an event says your colony
declared independence and you lose it. You remove
the card from play and move three yellow tokens
from your yellow bank to the box, but you do not lose
population.
Gaining And Losing Yell ow and Blue Tokens
You have 25 yellow tokens and 16 blue tokens at the
start of the game. Whenever you put a card with
or symbols into play, you gain the depicted
number of yellow or blue tokens. Take them from the
box and put them in the appropriate bank on your
player board. If the card leaves play, you must return
the depicted tokens from your bank to the box.
The symbol works the opposite way. You move
a blue token from your blue bank to the box when you
put the card in play. You gain a blue token from the
box if the card leaves play.
There are also some effects and rules that require you
to gain or lose yellow or blue tokens. Unlike white and
red tokens, your number of yellow and blue tokens
cannot be calculated just by looking at the cards you
have in play.
 When you gain a yellow or blue token, take it from
the box and put it in the corresponding bank on
your player board.
 When you lose yellow tokens, return them from
your yellow bank to the box. If you do not have
enough, return all those in your yellow bank but
no more.
 When you lose blue tokens, return them from your
blue bank to the box. If you do not have enough,
you must also return some from your technology
cards to make up the shortfall.
... Subsequent Rounds ...
Current Tactic
Each player may only have one current tactic.
If you have one, it is marked by your tactics
standard. At the start of the game, everyone's
tactics standards are in the common tactics area of
the military board and no one has a current tactic.
You choose your current tactic by playing a tactic or
copying a tactic during your Action Phase. You may
perform at most one of these actions per Action Phase.
Once you have chosen a current tactic, it will remain
your current tactic until you choose a different one.
Playing a Tactic
You may play a tactics card from your hand during
your Action Phase.
To play a tactics card:
 Pay 1 military action. (This is depicted in the
upper left corner of the card.)
 Put the card in your play area.
 Put your tactics standard on it to mark it as your
current tactic.
 Update your strength rating.
If you already had a current tactic, it stops applying
to you. Your armies are reorganized according to your
new current tactic.
Making Tactics Available
While your tactics card is in your play area, no one
else can use it. But every civilization has  hrewd
generals, and it doesn't take long before everyone
knows about your new trick.
After you replenish the card row and before your
Politics Phase, you must move any tactics card in
your play area to the common tactics area of the
military board.
In other words, the tactic remains exclusive to you
for only one round.
Your tactics standard remains on the card, so it is
still your current tactic and its contribution to your
strength rating does not change. The only difference
is that now anyone can copy it.
There is no limit to the number of tactics cards that
may be in the common tactics area. Organize them in
any suitable way.
Copying a Tactic
Once a tactics card is in the
common tactics area, it becomes
possible to copy it during your
Action Phase.
To copy a tactic:
 Choose any tactic in the common tactics area.
 Pay 2 military actions (as depicted on the military
board).
 Move your tactics standard to the chosen card.
It becomes your current tactic.
 Update your strength rating.
It does not matter how a tactic became your current
tactic. Copied tactics have the same effect as tactics
you played yourself.
In the common tactics area, multiple players can
have their standards on the same tactics card. They
all use it without limitations.
Some tactics cards in the common tactics area may
have no tactics standards if all players abandon them.
They remain on the board, available to be copied.
Note: Copying a tactic costs you 2 military actions,
even if it is one you originally played.
Tactics Cards
Armies
Set of unit types required to
form one army.
Tactical strength of each army.
If you have a current tactic, your military units
organize themselves into armies. Each set of units
makes one army. If you can make multiple sets, you
make multiple armies. The tactics card specifies how
many of each type are required to make one set.
Each army consists of a set of units depicted on your
current tactics card. A unit can only be part of one
army.
Each army has a tactical strength that is added
to your strength rating. This is in addition to the
contributions of the individual units.
Example: These
five units give
your civilization
a strength of 6.
If you have no
current tactic,
that is your
strength rating.
If your current
tactic is Fighting Band, your four
warriors form 2 armies. Your
knight unit would not be in any
army. The 2 armies each have a tactical strength of
+1, thus your strength rating is 8.
If your current tactic is Phalanx, you form only
one army, but it has a tactical strength of +3. Your
strength rating is 9.
You don't spend actions or move any physical
pieces to group your units into armies. They group
themselves automatically. Just do the calculation and
update your strength rating.
Outdated Armies
Age II and Age III tactics cards depict 2 tactical
strengths. The greater value is for normal armies and
the lesser value is for outdated armies.
An army is outdated if any unit in the army is 2 or
more levels lower than the tactics card.
For example, if you are using an Age II tactic, any
army with an Age A unit is outdated.
An outdated army has the lesser tactical strength
depicted on the tactics card.
Your armies automatically form sets in the way that
provides maximum tactical strength.
Note: When determining whether your army is
outdated or not, you consider the age printed on the
tactics card, not the current age.
Example:
If your current tactic is Defensive
Army, you can form only one
army. You cannot form it without including an Age A
infantry unit, so it will be outdated. It contributes +3
to your strength rating.
If your current tactic is Mobile Artillery, you can form
two armies. The Age I cavalry units are not outdated
when used with an Age II tactic, so each army
contributes the larger amount printed on the card.
Their total contribution is +10.
If your current tactic is Conquistadors, you can from
two armies. One of these has an Age A infantry unit, so
it is outdated. The other is not outdated. The outdated
army has tactical strength of +3, and the other has
tactical strength of +5. The total contribution is +8.
In each case, the armies' contribution is in addition
to the base strength of 18 that you get from the units.
Armies During Colonization
The units sent to colonize a territory may form
armies, too. The tactical strength of these armies
contributes to the colonization force.
Example:
You have the Conquistadors current tactic and these
units available to send. If you send enough units, they
may form an army and increase your colonization
force.
If you send both knights and the swordsman, your
colonization force will be 11: the units contribute 6,
and the army has a tactical strength of +5.
If you send both knights and the warrior, the
colonization force will form one outdated army.
The total will be 8: the units contribute 5, and the
army has tactical strength +3. Note that the warrior
unit automatically joins the army, even though it
was not part of an army when you calculated your
civilization's strength rating.
Sending all your units would give you a colonization
force of 12.
Effect of Your Current Tactic
Tactics cards allow you to group your units into armies, which give your civilization additional strength.
... Subsequent Rounds ...
Happiness and Discontent Workers
During the game, you will be able to increase your happiness rating in various
ways, usually by building specific urban buildings or by completing certain
wonders. As you do so, your happiness rating marker will move along the top
of your yellow bank. Below each circle of your happiness indicator is a specific
subsection of your yellow bank. When a subsection is emptied, that means you
need more happiness to keep everyone happy.
If you don't have enough happy faces, you will have discontent workers.
Your number of discontent workers is equal to the number of empty subsections
to the left of your happiness marker.
If discontent workers outnumber unused workers, you have a problem. Unless
you fix it, you will face an uprising that causes you to skip your Production Phase.
Examples are given below:
A Need for Happy Faces
After you increase your population for the second time, subsection 1 of your yellow
bank is empty. You need at least 1 happy face to keep your people happy.
You can either increase your happiness rating (usually by building something) or
accept the fact that one of your workers will be discontent.
Enough Happy Faces
If you manage to increase your happiness by one or more, everything is okay
for now. Your happiness marker is above the empty subsection, and everyone is
happy.
A Discontent Worker
On the other hand, if you do not give your people some happy faces, you will have
a discontent worker. You can represent this by taking one of your unused workers
and putting it on the circle above the empty subsection.
This worker still counts as an unused worker, and it can be used just as if it were
in the worker pool. However, it is not in the worker pool for a good reason  to
remind you that you have a discontent worker. If you do not have enough unused
workers to cover each missing happy face, you will face an uprising at the end of
your turn, which means that your civilization will not produce anything.
A Possible Uprising
Later in the game, you face a situation like this:
You have two discontent workers. However, you have only one unused worker. That
means one of your discontent workers must work. This will lead to an uprising if
you do not correct the situation.
What are your options?
 You may upgrade your temple. This will increase your happiness rating to 2,
and you will have only one discontent worker. Your unused worker is enough to
cover the missing happy face, so you will face no uprising.
 You may build a new Age I temple. The worker on the happiness indicator is
an unused worker, so it can be used for this. This will increase your happiness
rating to 3, which is just enough to keep everyone happy. You will have no
discontent workers.
 You may increase your population. That will give you one more worker, without
emptying subsection 4. You still have two discontent workers, but now you
have a second unused worker. You put it on the second missing happy face to
show that discontent workers do not outnumber unused workers. There will be
no uprising this turn, but you should find a more permanent solution. If you
increase population again, you empty another subsection and the new worker
goes right on the missing happy face space.
 You could also get an unused worker by destroying a farm, mine or urban
building, or by disbanding a military unit. That's not a very good option.
 Letting it go and accepting the uprising is the worst option, and you are forced
to do so only rarely.
If you want your population to happily work for you, you also need to think about them.
... Subsequent Rounds Discard Excess Military Cards
Your number of red tokens defines
the maximum number of military
cards you are allowed to have after
this step.
If necessary, you must discard military cards so
that your total is not greater than the number of red
tokens you have. They are discarded face down
Streamlining the Game
Once you have decided which military cards to
discard, the rest of your turn is automatic. That is,
it requires no more decisions. The next player may
start his or her turn as soon as you finish discarding.
Of course, if anything happens on that player's turn
that interacts with your civilization, that turn will
need to pause until you finish your End-of-Turn
Sequence.
Production Phase
Uprising
If you have more discontent workers than unused
workers, you face an uprising and skip the Production
Phase.
Uprisings are explained on the previous page.
Essentially, if your civilization is forcing unhappy
people to work, they get so mad that they stop
producing for you. Skipping your Production Phase
is the only consequence of an uprising, but it is
definitely a consequence you want to avoid. A lot of
good things happen in your Production Phase.
Score Science and Culture
As always, advance your points counters
according to your science and culture
ratings.
If, through brilliant play, your points
exceed the amount that can be depicted
on the scoring track, flip the counter
over to represent that you have that many points
and start counting again from zero. For example,
a flipped-over culture points counter on space 10
represents 160 culture points.
Corruption
Corruption happens if you try to
stockpile too much food and resources.
An unfinished wonder can also
contribute to corruption. When there are
extra food and resources lying around,
someone always finds a way to make
them disappear.
If one or more negative numbers in your blue bank
are uncovered, the leftmost uncovered number is the
amount of corruption you face. If they are all covered,
there is no corruption.
You face no corruption if you have at least 11 blue
tokens in your blue bank.
Example:
In this case, you face corruption of -4.
During this step, you lose resources equal to your
corruption. If you do not have that many resources,
you lose all your resources and make up the difference
by losing food.
In other words, you move blue tokens representing
that many resources from your mine technology
cards to the bank. And if you don't have enough, you
move blue tokens from farm technology cards. Don't
forget that one blue token can represent more than
1 if it is on a higher level technology card.
Tip: You can avoid corruption by good planning, by
gaining cards that give you more blue tokens, and
especially by developing advanced farm and mine
technologies. Higher level technology cards can
store more food and resources while using fewer blue
tokens.
Food Production
As always, for each worker on a farm
technology, move one blue token from
your blue bank to that card. A worker on
a higher level card still produces only
one blue token, but the token is worth
more food.
Consumption
Consumption increases as
your yellow bank gets
emptied.
If one or more negative numbers in your yellow bank
are uncovered, the leftmost uncovered number is the
amount of stored food your civilization consumes.
If they are all covered, there is no consumption.
Example:
In this case, you consume 3 food during the
Production Phase.
You must pay that much food. If you do not have
enough, pay all that you can and lose 4 culture points
for each you did not pay.
Note: It is unlikely that you will face a food shortage
early in the game. Consumption happens after food
production, thus you should have enough, unless
you did something unwise like destroying all your
farms. Later, however, consumption increases. If it
outgrows your food production, you should try to fix
the problem.
Resource Production
As always, for each worker on a mine
technology, move one blue token from
your blue bank to that card. A worker on
a higher level card still produces only
one blue token, but the token is worth
more resources.
Summary  Blue Bank
 Your blue bank holds blue tokens.
 Some cards and effects may alter your number of
blue tokens. You take blue tokens from the box or
return them to the box only in these special cases.
 During your Production Phase, you move blue
tokens from the blue bank to your farm and mine
technology cards, one blue token for each yellow
token on the card.
 A blue token on a farm or mine technology card
represents the amount of food or resources shown
on the bottom of the card.
 Blue tokens can represent food or resources even
if the card has no workers.
 You pay food or resources by moving blue tokens
back to the blue bank.
 When paying, you are allowed to make change
by moving a token to a lower value card or by
exchanging a token on a higher value card for
multiple tokens of lower values.
 You never make change by moving tokens from
lower value cards to higher values.
 Blue tokens are also placed on unfinished wonders
to represent completion of each stage.
 The blue bank is always filled from left to right.
If a red negative number is uncovered, it is your
civilization's corruption.
 Corruption has no effect until your Production
Phase. During the corruption step, you must pay
that many resources. If you fall short, you must
make up the difference by paying food.
Draw Military Cards
Draw 1 military card from the
current military deck for each
unused military action. Your draw
them even if the resulting number of
cards exceeds your hand limit.
You may never draw more than
3 cards this way.
If you have more than 3 unused military actions, you
draw only 3 military cards.
If the current military deck runs out, shuffle the
discarded military cards of the corresponding age to
form the new military deck.
In your first game we do not use Age III cards; thus in
Age III, you draw no cards.
Summary  Cards in Hand
 Your hand limit for civil cards is your number of
white tokens.
 You are not allowed to take a civil card into your
hand if you are already at your hand limit.
 However, even if you are at your hand limit you
can still take a wonder. Wonders go directly into
play without entering your hand.
 Your hand limit for military cards is your number
of red tokens.
 Unlike the limit for civil cards, your military
cards hand limit never prevents you from drawing
military cards.
 You only check your hand limit for military
cards during the first step of your End-of-Turn
sequence. If you exceed the limit at that time, you
must discard down to the limit.
 Later in the sequence, when you draw new
military cards, you may exceed the limit again.
Reset Actions
The last step of your turn is to move
all spent actions back to your
government card.
End-of-Turn Sequence
As your civilization grows, all steps of your End-of-Turn Sequence become relevant.
End of an Age
End of Your First Game
End of Age Age A ended immediately when the starting player
replenished the card row for the first time, as
described on page 8.
New Current Decks
You placed the Age I civil deck and the Age I military
deck on the current age board. They became the
current decks. Nothing more happened at the end of
Age A.
End of Age I
When the Age I civil deck runs out, Age I ends. This
can happen on any player's turn, while he or she is
replenishing the card row.
When the civil deck runs out,
the illustration on the board is
revealed. It reminds you of the
steps at the end of an age.
The steps apply to all players.
This means that if the Age I deck runs out,
Age A cards become antiquated.
Discarding Antiquated Cards
Players discard all antiquated cards
from their hands.
Removing Antiquated Leaders and
Unfinished Wonders
Anyone who still has an Age A leader
must remove the leader from play.
Anyone with an unfinished Age A
wonder must remove it from play. (Any blue tokens
on it are returned to that player's blue bank.)
The illustration also reminds you to remove
antiquated pacts, but you do not have pacts in your
first game.
All other cards, including completed wonders, remain
in play, regardless of their age.
Losing Yell ow Tokens
Finally, all players return two yellow tokens
from their yellow banks to the box. This
represents the fact that your population becomes
more demanding as you advance through the ages.
Advanced civilizations expect more bread and
circuses.
Tip: Plan ahead for the end of the age. Civilizations
that ignore food production or happy faces will be in
serious trouble.
New Current Decks
Age I has now ended and Age II begins. Shuffle the
Age II civil deck and put it on the current age board.
It is now the current age civil deck. If the card row
was not fully replenished when the old deck ran out,
fill in the empty spaces with Age II cards.
Remove the Age I military deck from the current age
board. Shuffle the Age II military deck and put it in
place. It is now the current age military deck.
Note: Cards in the current and future events decks
are not affected by the end of an age.
End of Age II Age II ends when the Age II civil deck runs
out. This works like the end of Age I, except
now Age I cards become antiquated:
 Players discard all Age I cards from their hands.
 Remove Age I leaders and Age I unfinished
wonders from play.
 Each player loses 2 yellow tokens.
No Current Decks
Age II ends and Age III begins. In your first game,
there are no Age III cards, so you remove the Age II
military deck and leave the current age board empty.
From now on, no new cards will be dealt to the
card row. Players still remove cards and slide the
remaining cards to the left, but the spaces on the
right will stay empty. No one may draw any more
military cards.
The Last Round
After Age II ends, each player should have at least one
more turn. It depends on who was the first player at
the beginning of the game.
 If Age II ends during the first player's turn, this
round is the last round of the game.
 Otherwise, you finish this round and the next
round will be the last round of the game.
In either case, the player to the right of the starting
player will play the last turn of the game, so everyone
will finish after the same number of turns.
Summary  Yell ow Bank
 Your yellow bank holds yellow tokens.
 Some cards and effects may alter your number of
yellow tokens. You take yellow tokens from the
box or return them to the box in these special
cases.
 You also return two yellow tokens to the box at the
ends of Ages I and II (and Age III in the full game).
 A yellow token outside your yellow bank is
a worker. See Summary  Workers on page 14.
 To turn a token in your yellow bank into a worker,
you perform the "increase population" action.
The food cost is given by the white number
underneath the section from which you take the
worker. It goes to your worker pool.
 Workers return to your yellow bank only when
you sacrifice units for colonization, or when an
effect requires you to decrease your population.
 Yellow tokens in your yellow bank are not
workers. They are part of a bookkeeping system.
The yellow bank is emptied from the right. When
a section is emptied, a red negative number is
revealed. This is your civilization's consumption.
 Consumption has no effect until your Production
Phase. During the consumption step, you must
pay that much food. If you fall short, you must
pay 4 for each missing .
 Above each subsection is a number with a happy
face. If a subsection is empty, your civilization
needs that many happy faces. If you have fewer,
the number of empty subsections to the left of the
happiness marker is your number of discontent
workers. See the Happiness and Discontent Workers
section on page 19.
Summary - Discarding cards
 Civil cards are discarded face up.
 Civil cards that are discarded or removed from
play will never enter the game again. You can
return them to the box.
 Military cards are discarded face down.
 Played and discarded military cards are sorted by
their backs. If the military deck for the current
age runs out, the discarded cards of that age are
shuffled to form a new deck.
 Non-territory events are put on the past events
pile after they are evaluated. They will not enter
the game again.
Final Scoring
At the end of your first game, each player scores extra culture points for civilization
achievements:
 Score 1 culture for each of your Age I technologies and 2 culture for each of your
Age II technologies. Your government counts twice.
 Score culture equal to your science rating.
 Score culture equal to your strength rating.
 Score culture equal to your happiness rating.
 Score culture equal to your food and resource production. (Count up how much
food and resources your workers produce during your production phase. Ignore
corruption and consumption.)
 Score 3 culture for each of your colonies.
 Score 6 culture for each of your completed Age II wonders.
Go through the scoring list step by step, giving each player a chance to count up
the corresponding number of points.
Note: This list applies only to your first game. The full game has a different endof-
game scoring system.
The Winner
The player with the most culture points wins.
In case of a tie, all tied players share the victory.
But what's most important is that you finished your first game of Through the
Ages. Next time, you will be ready to play the full game.
The old age comes to an end and the new age begins, bringing new opportunities
for your glorious civilization.
The game ends when the last player (the player to the right of the starting player) finishes his or her last turn.
Then it is time for final scoring.
The Full Game
In the full game, Age III is a full age like Ages I and II.
After resolving the end of Age II, shuffle the Age III
civil and military decks and place them on the current
age board as the new current age decks. The game
continues for another age.
Age IV is the game-ending age. This works like the
game-ending age in your first game:
 When the Age III civil deck runs out, Age II cards
in hand are discarded, Age II leaders, unfinished
wonders, and pacts are removed from play. Each
player loses 2 yellow tokens. Age IV begins. It has
no current age decks.
 If Age IV begins during the first player's turn, it is
the last round. Otherwise, the following round is
the last round.
Age III Wonders
Age III wonders have a one-time
effect that is resolved as soon as they
are completed. You score a certain
number of culture points based on
your other cards and workers in play.
Some of these have notes in the
Appendix on the back page of the Code
of Laws.
Air Force Units
Air forces are a new type of military unit that
appear only in age III.
An air force unit contributes its strength to your
strength rating, like any other military u nit. No
tactic requires air forces, but an air force unit can
join any army to double its tactical strength. Each air
force unit can be assigned to at most one army.
Example:
All these units contribute to your strength rating.
In addition, your tactic allows you to form three
armies. Normally, an army's tactical strength is
+2, but two of them also get air force units, which
doubles their strength to +4. All together, the armies
contribute a tactical strength of +10.
The Conquistadors tactic is even better.
You form two armies. One of these has
a warrior unit, so it is outdated. Each
army gets an air force, which doubles
its tactical strength. The outdated one
gives you +6. The other one gives you
+10. Together they contribute +16 to
your strength rating, in addition to the total strength
of your individual units.
If you switch to Shock Troops, it would
not be better than Conquistadors.
You now have only one army. It has an
Age I unit, so it is outdated. Even with
an air force unit to double its strength,
it has tactical strength of only +12.
The other air force unit will be not in
any army (but it still contributes 5 to your strength
rating, just like the one in an army). On the other
hand, if you upgraded one of those knights, the army
would no longer be outdated. You would get +22 from
one army!
You play the full game with all the military cards.
The decks now include aggressions, wars, and pacts.
These give you new options in your Politics Phase.
You also have the option to resign if you are losing
badly.
The full rules for playing these cards can be found
on page 4 of the Code of Laws. Wars are resolved one
round after they are played, as explained on page 3 of
the Code of Laws. Now that you understand the rest of
the game, you should have no trouble understanding
those rules.
Here, we will give you only a brief overview.
Military Part of the Game
Military is an important part of the game. It is
difficult to win the game purely through military
strength, but it is very possible to lose the game if
you ignore it.
Events
Even if the players are not very
aggressive, the strongest civilizations
will benefit and the weakest will
suffer from strength-related events.
To come out ahead, it is enough to
make your civilization slightly
stronger than the others each turn.
Agg ressions
If another player becomes significantly
stronger than you, he or she may play
an aggression against you.
Aggressions are played as political
actions. The attacker must also spend
some military actions.
To defend, you must
match or exceed the attacker's strength
by playing temporary bonuses from
your hand. A military bonus card will
add its defense value (depicted in the
upper half of the card) to your strength. You may also
discard any military card face down for an additional
+1 bonus. The number of cards played or discarded
this way cannot exceed the total number of red
tokens you have.
If you can't match or exceed the attacker's strength
(of if you decide not to) then the aggression is
successful. Usually, the attacker steals or destroys
something that belongs to your civilization.
Try not to fall too far behind in strength, especially
if you don't have bonus cards to defend against
aggressions. And conversely, if you get far ahead of
an opponent, it might be a good idea to attack.
Tip: Civilizations are especially vulnerable after
they colonize a territory, as they have just sacrificed
military units and possibly spent bonus cards.
Wars
Maybe you get tired of continuing the
arms race. You fall so far behind that
not even bonus cards can save you,
and you decide that being vulnerable
to aggressions is the price you have to
pay for focusing on more civilized
pursuits. Maybe this is a good
strategy, or maybe you are just inviting a declaration
of war.
A player declares war during his or her Politics Phase,
but it is not resolved immediately. Both players have
one turn to increase their strength, although the
player who declared war has already spent military
actions on the declaration and might not have many
left. The war will be resolved at the beginning of the
attacker's next turn.
Unlike aggressions:
 Neither player gets a strength bonus from playing
bonus cards or discarding military cards. Only the
cards already on the table count.
 In a war, either side can be the victor and inflict
the penalties on the defeated civilization. (In an
aggression, if the attacker does not win, the card
has no effect.)
 The severity of the penalties depends on the
difference between the two sides' strengths.
(It doesn't matter whether you lose an aggression
by 5 or by 20. In a war, it really matters.)
Thus, ignoring your military completely may not pay
off because other players may declare wars against
you.
Conversely, if you see other players falling far behind
in strength, you might consider declaring war. But be
cautious. A civilization with a strong economy may
be able to significantly improve its strength rating in
one turn. You don't want to lose the war you declared.
Pacts
Pacts are used only in a 3- or 4-player game.
In a 2-player game, remove them from the military
decks before the game starts.
Pacts add a little diplomacy and cooperation to the
game. As your political action, you may offer a pact
to another player. That player may accept or refuse
it. If the player accepts, the pact takes effect and
remains in play. If the player refuses, the pact is
returned to your hand. This ends your Politics Phase,
but you can try again later.
Note: You should not circumvent this rule by
discussing the pact before you offer it.
You can be a party to more than one pact, but you
can have only one pact in your play area. If you offer
a new pact and the player accepts, any pact in your
play area is automatically cancelled. You can also
use your political action to cancel any pact to which
you are a party. Pacts also leave play automatically if
they become antiquated at the end of an age (just as
leaders and unfinished wonders do).
Politics Phase
Age III
The full game will be like your first game, but with new cards to discover in Age III and more
opportunities to interact with rival civilizations.
... The Full Game
Some pacts are symmetric, and both
players benefit. But this benefit may
be double-edged. It's nice to have an
open border with another civilization
until they decide to attack you. It's
nice to cooperate on scientific research
until the other civilization spends all
your science points.
A B
Some pacts may be slightly
asymmetric, but complementary.
You just need to find a partner who is
lacking what you have to offer.
A B
Other pacts are strongly asymmetric,
where one player offers something to
another in exchange for peace or
protection. If you are weak, you may
offer such a pact to encourage
a stronger civilization to leave you
alone. On the other hand, if you are strong, you might
be able to use such a pact to extort a benefit from
a weaker civilization. When you offer an asymmetric
pact, you state who will be which side. The other
player can take the offer or leave it.
Note: Unless a pact specifically says so, it does not
prevent the parties from attacking each other.
And unless it says otherwise, the pact remains in
effect after the attack.
Remembering Extra Production
You can mark the extra production from certain
pacts by placing a red token from the box on an
Age A farm or mine. You can use this trick to mark
extra production from other cards, too, such as
Transcontinental Railroad.
Resigning
Hopefully this won't happen to you, but sometimes
everything just goes wrong. If everyone else is
stronger and your economy is not good enough to
catch up, you may find yourself falling further behind
every turn, an easy target for every aggression, war,
and negative event until the end of the game.
Of course, the game can still be fun even when you
are losing. You will not be forced to quit. But it is
possible to honorably resign. You admit you lost the
game and you let the others compare their strength
against each other, rather than compete to see who
can harvest more from your weakness.
You resign as your political action. Any wars declared
against you are cancelled (but they bring some
culture points to the players who declared them, as
history will remember who made you resign). Your
civilization and all its cards are removed from play.
If there are two or three players remaining, the game
continues as a two- or three-player game. If only one
player remains, that player has won.
But most of the time, the game should end with
everyone still in it, ready for the final scoring.
As with your first game, the full game ends when the
player to the right of the starting player finishes his
or her last turn.
The final scoring list from the first game does not
apply here. Instead, only some aspects of your
civilization will be scored. Players decide the final
scoring during play by preparing Age III events.
Final Scoring
At the end of the game, take all Age III events
remaining in the current and future events decks and
evaluate them one by one. Order is not important.
Note: Events from older ages have no effect on final
scoring.
Age III events
Each Age III event describes a way for civilizations to
score culture points. Age III events may be revealed
and resolved during play. Any still remaining in the
current or future events decks are evaluated at the
end of the game. When you prepare an Age III event,
you are guaranteed that it will be evaluated.
Most Age III events award each
civilization a certain number of
culture points based on the cards and
workers it has in play.
Some Age III events give players
points based on their relative order in
a certain statistic. On Impact of Science,
for example, the notation "14/7/0"
means that the player with the highest
science rating scores 14 and the
player with the second highest scores
7 . The third player scores nothing. The usual tiebreaker
applies: The player whose turn it is, or the
player closer to that player in play order, wins the tie.
During final scoring, break these ties as though it
were the starting player's turn.
This is an advantage, but a player who plays later has
the advantage of knowing the final statistics of those
who finished the game earlier.
The Winner
After evaluating all the Age III events that were
prepared, the scores are final.
Whoever has the most culture points wins the game.
In case of a tie, the tied players share the victory.
But what's most important is that every player
got a chance to tell the unique story of his or her
civilization.
Cards, pieces, and tokens can be stored in the box as shown. You can sort
the cards into civil and military decks for each age. If you expect to be
playing mostly two- or three-player games, the cards you remove from
the decks can be kept separate, making it easy to set up the game next
time you play.
The game boards can sit on top as shown, beginning with the current
age board and finishing with the culture and science boards, which can
fit next to each other. Atop these will be room for the player boards, the
rulebooks, and the quick reference sheets.
During play, the white, red, yellow, and blue tokens not used during
setup can be left in the box, from which they can easily be retrieved when
needed.
If you prefer to keep your cards in sleeves, we recommend storing them
sideways as shown below.
End of the Full Game
How to Store the Components
What's New in the New Story
VARIANTS:
Through the Ages has been in print since 2006. A New Story of
Civilization is a new edition  a rebalancing based on nine
years of feedback from players who love the original game.
We have made many improvements, but the essence of the
game remains the same. Players who know Through the Ages:
A Story of Civilization will be able t o p lay t his new version
after reading this summary of changes.
The references in this section are to pages in the Code of
Laws, which is the complete rulebook for the game. It is
designed to make it easy to look up the details of a particular
rule quickly.
Changed cards
Many cards have changed, and not just the artwork. Read
them carefully when you play your first game with this new
edition. Some have more detailed explanations in the Code of
Laws (Appendix p 12).
End-of-Turn Sequence
The new End-of-Turn Sequence includes several changes.
The complete sequence is printed on your player board, so
you will quickly learn the new order without needing to
consult a rulebook.
Corruption
Corruption is now evaluated before food and resource
production. This makes it easier to tell if you are in danger
of facing corruption and easier to plan an efficient Action
Phase. You no longer need to imagine what your blue bank
will look like after production and consumption.
Three squares in your blue bank have a red negative number.
If one or more of these squares are empty during your
corruption step, the leftmost uncovered negative number
is your corruption. You lose resources equal to this amount.
If you do not have enough, lose all you have and lose food to
cover the difference. (Production Phase p 6.)
To maintain the proper amount of tension between
production and corruption, the number of blue tokens has
been lowered to 16. (Player Board p 2.)
Discarding Excess Military Cards
Excess military cards are discarded after the Action Phase
instead of before. This allows you to play a tactics card
before it is time to discard. Also, if you increase your military
actions, you immediately take advantage of your increased
hand limit.
However, the main reason for this change is to streamline
the game. It is easier to decide which cards to keep after you
have played your turn. (Discard Excess Military Cards p 6.)
Drawing Military Cards
Drawing m ilitary cards is not part of production anymore,
so it is not skipped during an uprising. (Draw Military Cards
p 6.)
Resetting Actions
Resetting actions is now officially part of the End-of-Turn
Sequence. (Reset Your Actions p 6.)
Leaders
Replacing a Leader
As before, if you have a leader in play when you play a new
leader, the old leader must leave play. But now you also get
1 civil action back. This applies only when you already have
a leader in play. (Play a Leader p 5.)
Civilization Ratings
No limits
Your culture, science, and strength ratings have no upper
limit. There is also no limit to how many science and culture
points y ou m ay h ave. You can t rack t he o verflow a ny w ay
you like. The counters and markers are designed to be
flipped over to indicate you are on your second trip through
a particular track.
Your ratings and points still cannot go below 0. And your
happiness r ating ( number o f happy faces) is still a lways
between 0 and 8. (Ratings p 10.)
Tactics
Tactics Standard
Each player has a tactics standard to mark his or her current
tactic. (Player Components p 2.)
Playing Tactics
Tactics may be played as in the original version  for
1 military action during your Action Phase. The card goes
to your play area and is marked by your tactics standard.
We call this an exclusive tactic. (Play a Tactic p 6.)
Making Tactics Available
Your tactic does not stay exclusive for long. At the beginning
of your turn, before your Politics Phase, move any exclusive
tactics card from your play area to the common tactics area
in the center of the military board. For the rest of the game,
any player will be able to copy it. (Make Tactics Available p 3.)
Copying Tactics
During your Action Phase, you may pay 2 military actions to
copy any tactic in the common tactics area. Put your tactics
standard on it to indicate it is now your current tactic.
One card may have multiple standards. You may play or copy
a tactic only once per turn. (Copy a Tactic p 6.)
Aggressions
No Sacrificing
Neither the attacker nor the defender is allowed to sacrifice
units during an aggression. Instead, we have created a new
way to defend that does not harm the defender's position
so much.
Defending
The defender can play defense bonus cards, as before.
In addition, the defender can discard any military card face
down for a one-time +1 strength bonus. The total number
of cards played or discarded in defense cannot exceed the
defender's military action total. (Play an Aggression p 4.)
Wars
No Sacrificing
Neither side is allowed to sacrifice units in a war. In the
original game, sacrificing often led to huge conflicts where
both sides sacrificed their entire military might at the end of
the game, leaving themselves vulnerable to random attacks
from other players. (Resolve a War p 3.)
If the full game is too long or too aggressive for your group,
you might try one of these variants. They are designed
to ensure the game is still engaging. However, because
the cards are balanced for the full game, certain cards or
combinations may be weaker or stronger than normal.
Shorter Game
To enjoy the full experience in a shorter amount of time, try
this variant. You play only t wo ages, but otherwise use the
full rules, including aggressions, wars, and pacts.
Setup
Set up as for the full game. In addition:
 Take all events from the Age III military deck to make an
end-of-game events deck. Shuffle the deck and deal two
events to each player. Players keep them next to their
player boards, face down. They cannot look at them until
the end of Age I.
 Deal three more Age III events face up. Place them where
everyone can read them.
 Take one War over Culture card from the Age III deck and
put it face up on the table next to the three events.
 The remaining Age III military cards and the Age III civil
cards are not used.
Wars
When you declare a war, you must play a war card from your
hand, as usual, but you can decide whether you are declaring
the war printed on your card or the war printed on the War
over Culture card. If you declare the Age III war, you pay
its military action cost instead. When the war is resolved,
your card is discarded. The option to replace a war with the
Age III war is always available, even when it is currently
being used in a not-yet-resolved war.
End of Age I
At the end of Age I, all players look at their Age III event
cards. Each player discards one face down and keeps the
other. No one is allowed to look at cards that other players
kept or discarded.
Final Scoring
At the end of the game:
 Each player scores 6 for each Age II wonder he or she
completed.
 Score the three publicly revealed Age III events.
 Shuffle the Age III events chosen by the players and
evaluate them one by one.
Peaceful Game
If you want to enjoy a game without wars and aggressions,
try a peaceful variant.
To play a peaceful game, simply remove all aggressions,
wars, and pacts from the military decks. (If you really like
the pacts, you may keep those four which do not refer to
attacks.)
The military part of the game is still relevant for
colonization and strength-based events. If you want it to be
more relevant, try the following:
Global Conflicts Variant
When Age I, Age II, or Age III ends, a global conflict occurs.
Each civilization scores culture equal to the difference
between its strength and the strength of the weakest
civilization. Thus, the weakest civilization will score
nothing.
More Variants
There were more variants in the rulebook of the original
game, and others have been developed by players over the
years. However, they were used only rarely. In developing
this edition, we concentrated on balancing and playtesting
the full game without modifications.
Of course, if there was a variant you liked, you can still use it
with this version of the game.
The changes we made to this new version were based on
what we and our testers liked most. But if you preferred
some aspects of the old rules (for example, sacrificing in
wars) you can include them in your house rules. Having fun
playing the game is more important than a perfect balance.
You might also want to
check ThroughTheAges.com.
If a good variant emerges and
becomes proven by the players,
we may make it official and
publish it there.
www.throughtheages.com




GAME NAME:
Star Wars: Rebellion

INTRODUCTION:
It is a period of civil war. The last remnants of the Old
Republic have been swept away, and the Empire rules the
galaxy by fear. Its newly constructed battle station, the
Death Star, is powerful enough to destroy any opposition.
Yet, there is a new hope. A brave few have chosen to stand
against the Empire. From their secret base, these Rebels
are making plans to deal the Empire a crushing blow and
restore freedom to the galaxy.
GAME OVERVIEW:
Star Wars: Rebellion lets players reenact the epic
struggle between the Rebel Alliance and the Galactic
Empire. Players take control of iconic characters from the
Star Wars saga, sending them on secret missions and
leading troops in combat across the galaxy.
Each of the two factions has very different strategies and
objectives. The Rebel Alliance is vastly outnumbered
and cannot survive a head-on fight; instead, it must
remain hidden and rely on subterfuge, guerrilla tactics,
and diplomacy to undermine the Empire. The Rebels win
the game by gaining enough support to start a full-scale
galactic revolt and overthrow the Empire.
The Galactic Empire is a vast, tyrannical regime that rules
many systems throughout the galaxy with an iron fist.
The Imperials can easily build terrifying weapons of war in
large quantities. Although their forces are many, their only
chance of extinguishing the spark of rebellion is to spread
throughout the galaxy, quell uprisings, and search for the
hidden Rebel base. They win the game by finding where
the Rebel base is located and conquering it.
USING THIS BOOKLET
The Emperor has made a critical error and the
time for our attack has come.
Mon Mothma, Star Wars: Return of the Jedi
The purpose of this booklet is to teach new
players how to play Star Wars: Rebellion. It is
recommended that players read this booklet in its
entirety before playing their first game.
This booklet is written from the perspective of a
two-player game. For example Rebel player is used
to refer to the Rebel faction as a whole, regardless of
the number of players in the game. Specific team-game
rules are described later in this booklet.
This game also includes a Rules Reference, which
explains detailed rules and special exceptions that
are omitted from this booklet. As questions arise
during the game, consult the Rules Reference.
MINIATURE ASSEMBLY
Each Death Star and Star Destroyer miniature needs
to be assembled before use, as shown below:

COMPONENTS:
- 1 Rules Reference and
- 1 Learn to Play Booklet
- 153 Plastic Miniatures (89 Imperial, 64 Rebel)
- 25 Leaders with Plastic Stands (12 Imperial, 13 Rebel)
- 32 Damage Markers (24 single, 8 double)
- 7 Attachment Rings
- 31 Probe Cards
- 34 Action Cards (16 Imperial, 18 Rebel)
- 30 Tactic Cards (15 Ground, 15 Space)
- 3 Destroyed System Markers
- 2 Faction Sheets (1 Imperial, 1 Rebel)
- 15 Objective Cards
- 68 Mission Cards (39 Imperial, 29 Rebel)
- 1 Game Board (split in 2 halves)
- 10 Custom Dice
- (5 Black, 5 Red)
- 12 Rebel Loyalty Markers
- 27 Subjugation/Imperial Loyalty Markers

At the start of
each ground
battle step,
draw 1 ground
tactic card.
During each
space battle
step, your
opponent rolls
2 fewer red dice.

Start of Combat
For each battle during the
first combat round, the Rebel
player rolls 1 fewer red die
and 2 fewer black dice.

STAR WARS: REBELLION
LEARN TO PLAY:
To set up the game, follow these steps:
1 . Choose Factions and Gather Components: Players
must choose who will control the Imperials and who will
control the Rebels for this game. If they cannot decide,
choose randomly.
Each player takes his factions plastic miniatures, leaders,
loyalty markers, faction sheet, mission cards, and action
cards, placing these components in front of him.
2 . Place Starting Leaders: Each player takes his four
leaders that do not have a recruit icon and places
them in the box labeled Leader Pool on his faction
sheet. All leaders that have recruit icons are placed
near the game board and cannot be added to the
leader pool until later in the game.
3 . Prepare Game Board and Time Track: Take both
halves of the game board and place them next to
each other in the center of the play area. Then place
the time marker on space 1 of the track and the
reputation marker on space 14 of the track.
4 . Prepare Objective Deck: Sort the objective cards into
three piles based on the number shown on the card
back (I, II, or III), and shuffle each pile individually. Then
place pile III on the Objectives space of the game
board; place pile II on the top of pile III, and finally place
pile I on top of pile II to create a single objective deck.
Then the Rebel player draws one card from the objective
deck, keeping it secret from the Imperial player.
5 . Prepare Action Decks: Each player takes all of his
action cards that have a recruit icon and shuffles them
to create his action deck. He places it facedown next to
his faction sheet on the side labeled Action Deck. All
action cards that do not have a recruit icon are not used
for the first game and are returned to the game box.

SETUP
Before playing the game for the first time, punch out all of the cardboard components and attach each leader to a
plastic stand.

6 . Prepare Tactic Decks, Markers, and Dice: Shuffle the
space tactic and ground tactic decks individually and
place them within easy reach of all players. Then take
all remaining markers and dice and place them nearby.
7 . Prepare Mission Cards: Players take their mission
cards and sort them as explained below.
I. Starting Missions: Starting mission cards are
identified by a curved arrow at the bottom of the
card. Each player takes his four starting mission
cards and sets them aside.
II. Projects: Project cards are missions that have a
white star in the bottom-right corner of the card.
The Imperial player takes the project cards and
shuffles them together. Then he places this deck
on the Project space of the game board.
III. Remaining Missions: Each player takes his
remaining mission cards and shuffles them to
create his mission deck. He places it facedown
next to his faction sheet on the side labeled
Mission Deck.
8 . Place Starting Units and Loyalty: For your first game
place units and loyalty markers on the game board as
described in the diagram on page 16. For future
games use the Advanced Setup on page 18.
9 . Choose Base Location: The Rebel player should make
sure that all systems that contain Imperial units have
been removed from the probe deck.
Then, from the remaining probe cards, the Rebel player
secretly chooses one card and places it facedown under
the Rebel base Location space of the game board.
Then the probe deck is shuffled and placed on the
Probe Deck space of the game board.
For your first game, make sure the Rebel player chooses
a system that is not adjacent to any Imperial units.
10 . Draw Starting Hand: Each player takes his four
starting missions and draws two cards from his mission
deck to create his starting hand. This hand of cards is
kept secret from his opponent.
Players are now ready to begin playing the game!
Project
Icon

STAR WARS: REBELLION
LEARN TO PLAY
PLAYING THE GAME:
Star Wars: Rebellion is played over a number of game
rounds. During each game round, players resolve
three phases in the following order:
1 . Assignment Phase: Players assign their leaders
to missions.
2 . Command Phase: Players take turns resolving
missions or placing leaders on the game board to
move units and start combats.
3 . Refresh Phase: Players resolve cleanup steps,
such as retrieving leaders, drawing mission cards,
launching probe droids, recruiting new leaders,
and building new units.
Each of these phases are explained in detail in the
following sections.
Players continue resolving game rounds until one faction
has won the game as explained later.
1. ASSIGNMENT PHASE
During this phase, players assign their leaders to missions.
Missions represent pivotal moments from the Star Wars
saga, such as stealing the Death Star plans. Each player
has a hand of mission cards that represent the different
missions his leaders can attempt.
The Rebel player starts by assigning any of his leaders to
missions. When he is finished, the Imperial player assigns
any of his leaders to missions.
To assign a leader to a mission, the player takes a mission
card from his hand and places it facedown near his faction
sheet. Then he chooses one or two leaders from his leader
pool and places them on top of that card.
Each mission has a skill requirement in the upper left hand
corner. These are explained in detail later, in the What are
Skills? sidebar.
Any leaders who are not assigned to missions remain in
the leader pool and can be used during the Command
Phase to move units or oppose enemy missions.
After the Imperial player finishes assigning his leaders,
players proceed to the Command Phase.
The Imperial player assigned two of his leaders to missions
and left his other two leaders in the leader pool.

WHAT ARE LEADERS?
Well, look at you, a general, huh?
Han Solo, Star Wars: Return of the Jedi
Leaders are famous characters from the Star
Wars universe, such as Princess Leia and Darth
Vader. These characters drive all core actions in
the game.
Leaders are required to move units and attempt
missions. The numbers on each leader indicate
the bonuses it provides in combat, and the
skill icons below the leaders name indicate its
strength for different mission types. These are
explained in detail later.
Princess Leia

2. COMMAND PHASE
During the Command Phase, players can move their
units and reveal their missions. Starting with the Rebel
player, players alternate taking turns by doing one of
the following:
Activate a System: Use a leader from his leader
pool to move units on the game board and possibly
start combat.
 Reveal a Mission: Use a leader on a mission card
to reveal the cards ability.
A player can pass at any time. After a player has passed,
his turn is skipped for the rest of the Command Phase.
After all players have passed, players proceed to the
Refresh Phase.
ACTIVATE A SYSTEM
Players move their units and initiate combat by activating
a system with a leader.
To activate a system, the player takes one leader from his
leader pool and places it in any system. When a system is
activated, he can move any of his ships from adjacent
systems to the activated system. A player cannot move
units out of a system that already contains one of his
factions leaders.
Each incoming ship can bring a number of
ground units along with it equal to its
transport capacity, which is found on its
faction sheet. TIE Fighters also require
transport as if they were ground units.
After moving units into a system that
contains opposing units, players resolve a
combat, which is explained later.
If a leader does not have any tactic values,
it cannot activate a system.
Transport
Capacity
Grand Moff Tarkin
Tactic Values
Finding the Rebel Base
After Imperial ground units move into a system, the
Rebel player must declare whether the Rebel base is in
that system.
If the Rebel base is in that system, the Rebel player must
reveal the base before resolving a combat. Rules for
revealing the Rebel base are explained in detail later.
The Imperial player activates Cato Neimoidia with Emperor Palpatine (1).
He can move the Star Destroyer and AT-AT from Sullust to Cato Neimoidia (2).
He cannot move the Stormtrooper from Corellia because it would require a
ship with transport capacity to bring it along (3). Also, he cannot move units
from Coruscant because it is not adjacent to Cato Neimoidia (4).
WHAT ARE SYSTEMS AND REGIONS?
Fear will keep the local systems in line. Fear of
this battle station.
Grand Moff Tarkin, Star Wars: A New Hope
The main area of the game board shows a
map of the Star Wars galaxy featuring 32 key
systems. Each system consists of planet art (1),
the systems name (2), space area surrounding
it (3), and its borders (4). Ground units in the
system are placed on the planet art, while ships
are placed in the space area around the planet.
There are eight regions of the game board,
separated from each other by large orange
borders. Each region contains four systems.
Most systems are populous systems, which
have a loyalty space (5) and resource icons (6)
that show which units the system produces. If a
system does not have a loyalty space or resource
icons, it is a remote system.
Shaded areas that are completely surrounded by
an orange line are impassible (7) and cannot be
moved through.

STAR WARS: REBELLION
LEARN TO PLAY
Other Mission Rules:
bb When a mission is attempted against a leader, it is
attempted in that leaders system.
bb Some mission cards have a leaders
image below the skill requirement.
Any leader can attempt these
missions. However, if the indicated
leader attempts this mission, he
adds two successes to his dice roll.
If the mission is resolved instead of
attempted, the cards ability will list
an additional effect if the matching leader
resolves this mission.
The color of the leaders frame is relevant only
in the team game.
RETRIEVE THE PLANS
Attempt against a captured leader.
If successful, the Rebel player must
reveal his hand of objective cards.
Choose 1 of these cards to place on
A leaders image
on a mission card.
REVEALING A MISSION
To reveal a mission, the player chooses a facedown
mission card that one of his leaders is assigned to. He flips
the card faceup and reads the card aloud.
Most mission cards instruct the player to attempt or
resolve the mission in a system. He must declare the
system in which he is attempting the mission, but he does
not make any other decisions at this time.
Then he places his leader in the declared system. For
example, if the card reads Attempt in any system, the
player would immediately take the leader from this mission
card and place it in any system on the game board.
Important: If a mission is attempted or resolved in the
Rebel Base space, the leader is placed in the Rebel
Base space of the game board and not in the system
where the Rebel base is hidden.
Missions use two different terms that dictate the outcome
of the card:
bb The term resolve means that the cards ability
automatically occurs and cannot be opposed.
bb The term attempt means that the cards ability is
only performed if the mission succeeds. The mission
will automatically succeed unless it is opposed by
an opponents leader, which is explained below.
Important: After using a starting mission card,
the player returns the card to his hand. All
other mission cards are discarded after use.
Opposing a Mission
After a player declares where he is attempting a mission,
his opponent has a chance to send one leader from his
leader pool to oppose that mission. An opposing leader is
placed in the system where the mission is being attempted.
If both players have a leader in the system, the mission
is opposed. Both players roll dice to determine whether
the mission succeeds or fails. Each player rolls dice (of any
color) equal to the combined number of skill icons on all
of his leaders in the system. He rolls dice only for skill
icons that match the missions skill requirement.
Each  and  rolled is one success. Each  rolled is two
successes. If the player attempting the mission rolls more
successes than his opponent, the mission succeeds and he
performs the If successful ability on the card. If he rolls
equal to or fewer successes than his opponent, the mission
fails and he does not perform the ability on the card.
Starting Mission Icon
WHAT ARE SKILLS?
Secret mission? What plans? What are you
talking about?
C-3PO, Star Wars: A New Hope
All missions have a skill requirement in the topleft
corner of the card. This shows the minimum
number of skill icons that the assigned leaders
must match in order to reveal the mission.

GATHER INTEL
Attempt in any Rebel system.
If successful, draw 1 probe card
for every 4 Rebel units at the
Rebel base (minimum of 1 card).

This mission requires a leader that
has at least one intel () icon,
such as Emperor Palpatine.
The more matching icons a leader has, the more
likely that leader will succeed at its mission.
There are four skill types:
Diplomacy: These missions typically provide
loyalty in systems or give players more units.
Intel: Rebel intel missions typically help
acquire objective cards, while Imperial intel
missions help locate the Rebel base.
Spec Ops: Rebel spec ops missions typically
destroy Imperial units, while the Imperial spec
ops missions capture Rebel leaders and exploit
them in various ways.
Logistics: Rebel logistics missions typically
move units to and from the Rebel base, while
Imperial logistics missions build special units or
accelerate Imperial units build time.

MISSION EXAMPLE
1 . At the start of the Command
Phase, the Rebel player
chooses to reveal Princess
Leias mission. He flips the card
faceup, revealing Infiltration,
which can be attempted in any
Imperial system.
2 . He decides to attempt this
mission at Coruscant, placing
Leia there.
3 . The Imperial player decides
to send Emperor Palpatine to
oppose this mission. He takes
this leader from his leader pool
and places it at Coruscant.
4 . Infiltration has an intel
skill requirement, so players
count the number of intel
icons on their leaders in the
system. Both Leia and
the Emperor have two intel
icons, so each player
rolls two dice.
The Rebel player rolls a ,
and the Imperial player rolls
Because counts as
two successes, the mission
succeeds, and the Rebel
player can perform the
mission cards ability.
5. The Rebel player looks at the
top two cards of the objective
deck, places one on the top,
and places the other on the
bottom.
6. Since the Infiltration card is
a starting mission card, the
Rebel player returns this card
to his hand.
Now that the Rebel player has
finished resolving his mission, it is
the Imperial players turn to either
activate a system or reveal one of
his missions.

Attempt in any system that
contains an Imperial unit.
If successful, look at the top 2 cards
of the objective deck. Place 1 card on
the top of the deck and the other card
on the bottom.
INFILTRATION
Princess Leia
Emperor Palpatine
Attempt in any system that
contains an Imperial unit.
If successful, look at the top 2 cards
of the objective deck. Place 1 card on
the top of the deck and the other card
on the bottom.
INFILTRATION
STAR WARS: REBELLION
LEARN TO PLAY
3. REFRESH PHASE
During this phase, players prepare for the next round by
following these steps:
1 . Retrieve Leaders: Each player takes all of his
leaders from the game board and returns them to
his leader pool. If a leader is still on a mission card,
it returns to the leader pool, and the card returns to
the players hand.
2 . Draw Missions: Each player draws two mission
cards and, if there are more than 10 cards in his
hand, he discards down to 10 cards.
3 . Launch Probe Droids: The Imperial player draws
two probe cards. Each probe card shows one system
where the Rebel base is not located. The Imperial
player keeps these cards secret.
4 . Draw Objective: The Rebel player draws one
objective card and adds it to his hand.
5 . Advance Time Marker: Advance the time marker
one space along the track. Then players recruit
and/or build if any icons are shown in the time
markers new space.
I. Recruit Icon: Each player draws
two cards from his action deck,
chooses one leader shown on
either card, and places that
leader in his leader pool. When
playing your first game, the
abilities on both cards are ignored and the
cards are returned to the game box.
II. Build Icon: Each player builds
one unit matching each resource
icon in his loyal and subjugated
systems (explained later). For
subjugated systems, he uses
only the left-most resource icon.
He takes these units from the
supply and places them on his
build queue (see below) in the
space matching the number to
the left of the resource icon.
6 . Deploy Units: Starting with the Rebel
player, each player slides all units one
space down his build queue (toward
his edge of the board). Any units that
slide from the 1 space off the board
are ready to be deployed. The player
deploys these units (places them)
in systems that have his loyalty or
subjugation markers.
Each player can deploy a maximum of
two units in each system.
Resource Icons
and Number
Recruit Icon
on the Track
Build Icon
on the Track
The Rebel player may build units from, and deploy units
in, the Rebel Base space as if it were a system.
Systems that contain an opponents unit or a sabotage
marker cannot build units during step 5 nor deploy units
during step 6.
After deploying units, players begin a new game round
Imperial Build starting with the Assignment Phase.
Queue
BUILDING UNITS EXAMPLE
1 . During the Refresh Phase, the time marker
is advanced to a space that has a build icon.
2 . The Rebel player finds each system that has
Rebel loyalty and checks its resource icons.
Ryloth is loyal to the Rebels and has one
resource icon; according to the Rebel faction
sheet, a icon generates a Rebel Trooper.
3 . The number 1 next to the resource icon
indicates that this miniature is placed on
space 1 of the build queue (next to the
X-wing that is already there).
4 . After building units from all of his loyal
systems, he slides each unit in the queue
one space toward the Rebel edge of the
game board. The Rebel Trooper and X-wing
slide off the board, so they are now ready to
be deployed.
5 . The Rebel player decides to deploy both of
these units to Ryloth, so he places them in
the system.
REBEL ALLIANCE
X-WING REBEL TROOPER
Y-WING AIRSPEEDER
REBEL TRANSPORT SHIELD GENERATOR
CORELLIAN CORVETTE
ION CANNON
MON CALAMARI CRUISER
At the start of
each ground
battle step,
draw 1 ground
tactic card.
During each
space battle
step, your
opponent rolls
2 fewer red dice.
LEADER POOL
MISSION DECK
ACTION DECK

WINNING THE GAME:
The Imperial player immediately wins the game if he
conquers the Rebel bases system (e.g., there is an
Imperial unit in the system and there are no Rebel units).
This is such a major setback to the Rebellion that it
ensures Imperial dominance.
The Rebel player immediately wins the game if the
reputation marker and time marker are in the same space
of the time track. The Rebels garner enough sympathy
and reputation within the galaxy to set the decline of the
Empire into motion.
The most common way for the Rebels to gain reputation
is from objective cards.
OBJECTIVE CARDS
The Rebel player begins the game with one objective card
and draws one more during each Refresh Phase.
The Rebel player may play an
objective card from his hand if he
has fulfilled the cards requirement
at the specified time.
He discards the card and gains the
reputation shown in the top-left
corner of the card. He moves the
reputation marker that number of
spaces toward the time marker.
Only one objective can be played
during each combat and each
Refresh Phase.

CRIPPLING BLOW
Combat
Play after at least 3-health
worth of Imperial ground units
have been destroyed in a
combat that you initiated.
This objective can be
fulfilled during combat, and
it provides one reputation.
THE DEATH STAR
This station is now the ultimate power in the
universe. I suggest we use it!
Admiral Motti, Star Wars: A New Hope
The Death Star is a terrifying unit that can
destroy entire systems. To do this, the Imperials
need to use their Research and Development
mission to draw a Superlaser Online card from
the projects deck.
When a Death Star destroys a system, place
a destroyed system marker in the system and
destroy all Rebel ground units there. If the Death
Star destroys the system where
the Rebel base is located, the
Imperial player immediately
wins the game.
The Death Star can be
destroyed only by
the Death Star Plans card
found in the objective deck.
A destroyed
system marker.
STAR WARS: REBELLION
LEARN TO PLAY
ADDITIONAL RULES
This section contains all remaining game rules needed
to play the game.
THE REBEL BASE
During setup, the Rebel player secretly chooses a system
for his Rebel base, which starts the game hidden and can
be revealed later. This section explains all rules for finding,
revealing, and moving to and from the Rebel base.
While the Rebel base is hidden,
the Rebel player can deploy units
in the Rebel Base space of the
game board without revealing
the system in which his base is
located. When an effect refers
to the Rebel Base space, it
is referring to this space of the
game board and not the system
where the Rebel base is hidden.
MOVING TO AND FROM THE REBEL BASE
While the Rebel base is hidden, Rebel units can move
between the Rebel Base space and systems adjacent
to the system that contains the Rebel base. This means
that moving to or from the Rebel Base space will identify
one system that is adjacent to the base (or where the base
itself is located).
A few missions allow Rebel units to move between the
base and any system without revealing information.
REVEALING THE REBEL BASE
If the Imperial player ever has loyalty or ground units
in the same system as the Rebel base, the Rebel base is
immediately revealed. When Imperial ground units enter
the system, the base is revealed before resolving a combat.
When the base is revealed, the Rebel player flips the
probe card in the Location space faceup and places it
in the Rebel Base space. All units and leaders from the
Rebel Base space are placed in the system shown on the
probe card. The probe card remains faceup on the Rebel
Base space to remind players that the base is revealed.
While the base is revealed, the resource icons in the Rebel
Base space can still be used. However, units cannot be
deployed in or moved to the Rebel Base space. Any units
that would be placed here are instead placed in the system
shown on the bases faceup probe card.
ESTABLISHING A NEW BASE
The Rapid Mobilization mission card allows the Rebel
player to establish a new base. To do so, he draws the top
four cards from the probe deck. He may choose one of
those cards to become the new base location, but cannot
choose a system that has Imperial loyalty or Imperial units.
If he chooses a new base location, he reveals the old
bases location and places all units from the Rebel Base
space in the old bases system. The Rebel player will not
have any units at the new base until he either moves or
deploys units there.
He gives the old bases probe card to the Imperial player
and places the new bases probe card facedown under the
Location space. Then he shuffles all unchosen probe cards
and places them facedown on the bottom of the probe deck.
SABOTAGE MARKERS
Some Rebel missions place a sabotage
marker in a system, which means that
neither player can use its resource
icons to build new units, and units
cannot be deployed there. Sabotage
markers can be removed by some
Imperial missions.
A Sabotage Marker
in a System
Rebel Units at the
Rebel Base Space
LOYALTY AND SUBJUGATION
Neither faction can win the war without support from
citizens across the galaxy. Factions achieve support
by convincing star systems to join their cause, which is
represented in the game by loyalty. The Empire can
also occupy systems, subjugating the population and
compelling them to aid their galactic dominion.
LOYALTY
Each populous system has loyalty,
which represents whom the systems
population supports: Rebel, Imperial,
or neutral. A systems current loyalty is
indicated by which loyalty marker is in
the system. If a system does not have a
loyalty marker, it is neutral.
The main way that players gain loyalty in systems is by
resolving diplomacy () missions. The player who has
loyalty in a system can use the systems resources to build
new units.
When a player gains 1 loyalty in a system that is neutral,
place his loyalty marker in that system; the system is
now loyal to his faction. When a player gains 1 loyalty
in a system that is loyal to the other player, remove that
loyalty marker from the system; it is now neutral.
Each system that has an Imperial loyalty marker or
subjugation marker is an Imperial system. Coruscant
is always loyal to the Imperial player and cannot gain or
lose loyalty.
SUBJUGATION
The Imperial player can subjugate
systems to compel the inhabitants to
build Imperial units.
When there is at least one Imperial ground unit in a
system that does not have Imperial loyalty, the Empire
subjugates the system. Place a subjugation marker in the
systems loyalty space.
If the newly subjugated system had Rebel loyalty, place the
marker on top of the Rebel loyalty marker. This denotes
that the inhabitants are compelled to work for the Imperials.
If at any time there are no Imperial ground units in a
subjugated system, the subjugation marker is discarded
and the systems loyalty returns to the Rebels (or neutral
if no loyalty marker is beneath it).
The Imperial player can use a
subjugated systems left-most
resource icon to build new units.
The Rebel player cannot build
or deploy units in a subjugated
system, even if a Rebel loyalty
marker is under the subjugation
marker.
Imperial Loyalty Marker
Subjugation Marker
ATTACHMENT RINGS
Some card abilities attach rings onto
leaders, such as the captured leader ring.
When a ring is attached to a leader, press
the leaders stand snugly into the ring.
The rings effect is explained on the
card that brought the ring into play. If a
leader who already has a ring receives
another ring, the previous ring is
removed to make room for the new ring.
CAPTURING LEADERS
Some abilities, such as the one found
on the Imperial Capture Rebel
Operative mission card, cause a Rebel
leader to become captured. When a
leader is captured, attach the captured
leader ring to that leader. Captured
leaders typically do not oppose
missions; also, they cannot return to
the leader pool and cannot be moved
by the Rebel player. However, they do
not prevent Rebel units from moving out of their system.
Captured leaders can be moved by the Imperial player
like ground units. The Imperial player also has missions
that can be attempted against captured leaders, such as
interrogating a leader for information about the Rebel
base. When a mission is attempted against a captured
leader, that leader will oppose the mission even though it
is captured.
The Imperial player has only one captured leader ring. If he
captures a second leader, the first leader is rescued, and he
attaches the captured leader ring to the new leader.
RESCUING CAPTURED LEADERS
If there are no Imperial units in the captured leaders
system (usually after an Imperial defeat in combat), the
leader is immediately rescued. Some mission cards can
also rescue captured leaders.
When a captured leader is rescued, remove the ring from
the leader and place the leader in the Rebel Base space.
STRUCTURES
The Shield Generator and Ion Cannon are
special types of ground units called structures.
Structures are immobile (cannot move) and
do not provide dice in combat. Instead, they
provide abilities that occur during combat as
explained on the Rebel faction sheet.
Han Solo in the Carbonite
Attachment Ring
Captured Leader
Attachment Ring
Immobile Icon

At the start of
each ground
battle step,
draw 1 ground
tactic card.
During each
space battle
step, your
opponent rolls
2 fewer red dice.
ACTION DECK
STAR WARS: REBELLION
LEARN TO PLAY
COMBAT
When a player moves units to a system that contains
his opponents units, a combat is resolved. Players
resolve a combat by following these steps:
1 . Add Leader: If a player does not have a leader with
tactic values in the system, he may take one leader
from his leader pool and place it in the system.
2 . Draw Tactic Cards: Each player draws tactic cards
based on his leader in the system (if any). The player
draws space tactic cards equal to
his leaders space tactic value (blue),
and ground tactic cards equal to his
leaders ground tactic value (orange).
If a player has multiple leaders in the
system, he uses only the highest for
each value (space and ground).
3 . Combat Round: Players resolve a combat round in
which each unit performs one attack. To resolve a
combat round, follow these steps:
I. Space Battle: The current player resolves one
attack with all of his ships. Then his opponent
resolves one attack with all of his own ships.
Attacks are explained below.
Only resolve this step if both players have
ships in the system.
II. Ground Battle: The current player resolves
one attack with all of his ground units. Then
his opponent resolves one attack with all of his
own ground units.
Only resolve this step if both players have
ground units in the system.
III. Retreat: Starting with the current player,
each player has the option to retreat his units
from the system.
IV. Next Round: If both factions still have units
in the same theater (space or ground), they
resolve another combat round. Otherwise,
the combat ends.
RESOLVING AN ATTACK
To attack, the player rolls dice and deals damage to his
opponents units in that theater. To resolve an attack,
follow these steps:
1. Roll Dice
The player rolls dice matching the color
and quantity of the attack values of all his
participating ships or ground units. Each
attack is limited to a maximum of five red
and five black dice.
At the start of
each ground
battle step,
draw 1 ground
tactic card.
During each
space battle
step, your
opponent rolls
2 fewer red dice.
LEADER POOL
MISSION DECK
ACTION DECK
2. Combat Actions
After rolling the dice, the player performs any number
of combat actions, one at a time. There are two types of
combat actions:
bb Play a Tactic Card: The player plays a tactic card
from his hand and resolves its ability. Tactic cards
can target only units in the theater being resolved
and are discarded after use. If the card has the 
icon, the player must discard one of his  dice to
use the ability.
bb Draw a Tactic Card: The player can discard one of
his dice to draw one tactic card from this theaters
tactic deck. Tactic cards can be used either during
the same combat round in which they were drawn or
saved for later in this combat.
3. Assign Damage
After the player is finished resolving combat actions,
he chooses which units to assign damage to by placing
the dice (or cards) next to the units. Damage must be
assigned to units in the theater being resolved.
The icons on the dice can be used as follows:
 Hit: Deal one damage to a unit that has a health
value matching this dies color.
 Direct Hit: Deal one damage to a unit that has a
black or red health value.
Example: TIE Fighters roll black dice. Any rolled on
black dice can be assigned to an opponents unit in
that theater with a black health value (only X-wings or
Y-wings). Black  cannot be assigned to units with a red
health value, such as a Corellian Corvette.
4. Block Damage
The opponent can play tactic cards to block (remove)
damage assigned to his units. Blocked damage is canceled
and does not affect the assigned unit.
5. Destroy Units
If a unit has damage assigned to it equal to or exceeding
its health, it is destroyed (returned to the supply). If
the unit has not yet attacked this combat round, it is not
destroyed until the end of this combat step (either space
battle or ground battle). The unit is placed on its faction
sheet as a reminder that it will be destroyed at the end of
this step. The unit attacks as normal this combat round.
If a unit is assigned damage that is less than its health
value, place damage markers under the miniature to track
the damage. This damage remains during future combat
rounds and cannot be removed. All damage markers are
discarded at the end of the combat.
RETREAT
When a player retreats from combat, he moves his leader
and all of his units from that system to an adjacent
system, following normal movement and transport rules.
If a player does not have a leader in the system, he cannot
retreat. If the Imperial player has a Death Star in the
combat, he cannot retreat any of his units.
When retreating, the player must retreat to a system that
either contains his own units or has one of his loyalty
markers, if able. He cannot retreat units to a system that
contains his opponents units nor to a system that his
opponent moved units from to initiate the combat.
COMBAT EXAMPLE
1 . The Imperial player has activated
the Yavin system with Darth
Vader, moving one TIE Fighter
and one Star Destroyer.
2 . The Rebel player chooses to
add Jan Dodonna to the system,
taking him from his leader pool
and placing him in the system.
Both leaders have a space tactic
value of 2, so each player draws
two space tactic cards (not shown).
3 . The Imperial player attacks with
his ships first. He rolls two black
dice and two red dice.
4 . Now he performs combat actions.
He discards his  die to use a
 tactic card from his hand. This
card deals one damage to two
different units, so he deals one
damage to each Rebel fighter.
5 . Next, the Imperial player assigns
the black  to the Y-wing. The
red  cannot be assigned to
fighters because they do not
have a red health value.
6 . The Rebel player plays a card to
block one damage from the X-wing.
The Y-wing has sustained lethal
damage, so it will be destroyed at
the end of this combat step.
7 . Then the Rebel player attacks with
his ships. He rolls one black die
and one red die. He chooses not
to perform any combat actions.
8 . He decides to assign his black
to the TIE Fighter. The Imperial
player does not block this
damage, so the TIE Fighter
will be destroyed.
9 . Both the Y-wing and the TIE
Fighter are destroyed and
returned to the supply.
If both players had ground units in
the system, they would then resolve a
ground battle.

DEFENSIVE
FORMATION
Block 1 damage.
 LFL  FFG
ONSLAUGHT
Deal 1 damage to up
to 2 different ships.
 LFL  FFG
ONSLAUGHT
Deal 1 damage to up
to 2 different ships.

REBEL ALLIANCE
X-WING REBEL TROOPER
Y-WING AIRSPEEDER
REBEL TRANSPORT SHIELD GENERATOR
CORELLIAN CORVETTE
ION CANNON
MON CALAMARI CRUISER
At the start of
each ground
battle step,
draw 1 ground
tactic card.
During each
space battle
step, your
opponent rolls
2 fewer red dice.
STAR WARS: REBELLION
LEARN TO PLAY
FIRST GAME SETUP:
For the first game, each players starting units are placed as shown below. For future games, use the Advanced Rules
on page 18, which provide more setup options.
1 . Remove these cards from the
probe deck: Corellia, Mandalore,
Saleucami, Sullust, and Mustafar.
Shuffle the deck and return it to
its space on the game board.
2 . Kashyyyk: 1 Rebel loyalty marker.
3 . Bothawui: 1 Corellian Corvette,
1 Rebel Transport, 1 X-wing,
1 Y-wing, 3 Rebel Troopers,
1 Airspeeder, 1 Rebel loyalty
marker.
4 . Naboo: 1 Rebel loyalty marker.
5 . Rebel Base Space: 1 X-wing,
1 Y-wing, 3 Rebel Troopers,
1 Airspeeder.
6 . Saleucami: 1 Star Destroyer,
2 TIE Fighters, 2 Stormtroopers,
1 AT-ST, 1 Imperial loyalty marker.
7 . Mandalore: 1 Death Star,
4 TIE Fighters, 2 Stormtroopers,
1 AT-ST, 1 subjugation marker.
8 . Coruscant: 1 Star Destroyer,
1 Assault Carrier, 2 TIE Fighters,
3 Stormtroopers, 1 AT-AT, 1 AT-ST.
9 . Corellia: 1 Assault Carrier,
1 Stormtrooper, 1 Imperial
loyalty marker.
10 . Sullust: 1 Star Destroyer,
2 TIE Fighters, 2 Stormtroopers,
1 AT-ST, 1 subjugation marker.
11 . Mustafar: 1 Assault Carrier,
2 TIE Fighters, 2 Stormtroopers,
1 AT-ST, 1 Imperial loyalty
marker.

CREDITS
Game Design: Corey Konieczka
Game Development: Steven Kimball
Producer: Steven Kimball
Graphic Design: David Ardila, Edge Studios, and Samuel
Shimota, with Christopher Hosch and Monica Skupa
Managing Graphic Designer: Brian Schomburg
Cover Art: Darren Tan
Planet Art: David Ardila, Anthony Devine, Jos Mikhail
Elloso, and Stephen Somers
Interior Art: Matt Allsop, BalanceSheet, Christopher Balaskas,
Cristi Balenescu, Tiziano Baracchi, Ryan Barger, Jorge Barrero,
Cassandre Bolan, Jon Bosco, Matt Bradbury, Adam Burn,
Alexandre Dainche, Christina Davis, Allen Douglas, Tony
Foti, Michele Frigo, Mariusz Gandzel, Zach Graves, Richard
Hanuschek, Imaginary FS Pte Ltd, Andrew Johanson, Jeff Lee
Johnson, Jason Juta, Adam Lane, Ignacio Bazn Lazcano, Ralph
McQuarrie, Mark Molnar, Jake Murray, Ameen Naksewee,
David Auden Nash, Mike Nash, Maciej Rebisz, Alexandru
Sabo, Tony Shasteen, Matthew Starbuck, Nicholas Stohlman,
Angela Sung, Darren Tan, Ryan Valle, Jose Vega, VIKO, Magali
Villeneuve, Jacob Walker, Christer Wibben, and Ben Zweifel
Planet Art Direction: John Taillon
Managing Art Director: Andy Christensen
Plastic Sculpting: Jason Beaudoin with Bexley Andrajack,
Niklas Norman, and Gary Storkamp
Technical Editing: Autumn Collier
Proofreading: Adam Baker and Nicholas Houston
Quality Assurance Coordinator: Zach Tewalthomas
FFG Licensing Specialist: Amanda Greenhart
STOP!
If you want to play with two players, you now
know all rules needed to play your first game.
If you want to play with more than two players,
you must also read the Team Game rules on
page 19.
Before starting your first game, be sure to read
the First Game Strategy on the back page
aloud to all players.
As questions arise during the game, use the
Rules Reference to find the topic in question.
Good luck, and may the Force be with you!
Production Management: Simone Elliott and Megan Duehn
Executive Producer: Michael Hurley
Publisher: Christian T. Petersen
Playtesters: Cameron Abernathy, Brad Andres, Glen
Aro, Samuel Bailey, Adam Baker, Garrett Beatty, Craig
Broadbridge, Frank Brooks, Stefano Carlino, Jhonn
Clements, Chris J Davis, Kyle Dekker, Ronald DeValk, Emile
de Maat, Erik Dahlman, Marieke Franssen, Jon Gebhart,
Chris Gerber, Amanda Greenhart, Anita Hilberdink, Jesse
Horne, Tim Huckelbery, James Kniffen, Nathan Karpinski,
Justin Kemppainen, Patrick Knight, Peter Lacko, Brendon
Lam, Mark Larson, Josh Lewis, Kortnee Lewis, Scott Lewis,
Lukas Litzsinger, Robert Martens, Michael McFadgen, Adam
Mitchell, David Mitchell, Andrew Navaro, Kiefer Paulson,
Karly Perin, Jeremy Rainbow, Kendra Rainbow, Toby Rainbow,
Sharon Rogerson, Michael Sanfilippo, Brian Schomburg,
Alessio Serafini, Sean Serrin, Bree Smith, Sam Stewart, John
Taylor, Jason Walden, Elizabeth Wasowicz, and Mike Weir
Special thanks to all of our beta testers.
Lucasfilm Approvals: Chris Gollaher and Brian Merten
 &  Lucasfilm Ltd. Fantasy Flight Games and the FFG logo are  of Fantasy Flight
Publishing, Inc. Fantasy Flight Supply is a TM of Fantasy Flight Publishing, Inc. Fantasy
Flight Games is located at 1995 West County Road B2, Roseville, MN 55113, USA,
651-639-1905. Actual components may vary from those shown. Made in China.
NOT INTENDED FOR USE BY PERSONS AGES 13 YEARS OR YOUNGER.
STAR WARS: REBELLION
LEARN TO PLAY
ADVANCED RULES
After players have played their first game, they should
use the rules explained in this section, which includes
variable setup rules and thematic action card abilities for
each leader.
ADVANCED SETUP:
When setting up the game, players can start with loyalty
in different systems and choose where to place their units.
When resolving step 8 of setup, follow these steps instead
of using the First Game Setup on page 16.
1 . Shuffle the probe deck and reveal cards from the
top of the deck until three Rebel systems and five
Imperial systems have been revealed.
Place a Rebel loyalty marker in each
of the three Rebel systems. Place a
subjugation marker in the first two
Imperial systems drawn and an Imperial
loyalty marker in each of the other
three Imperial systems drawn.
Return the five Imperial probe cards
to the game box. Then shuffle all other
probe cards back into the probe deck.
2 . The Imperial player receives 3 Star Destroyers, 3
Assault Carriers, 12 TIE Fighters, 12 Stormtroopers,
5 AT-STs, 1 AT-AT, and 1 Death Star. These units can
be placed in any system that has an Imperial loyalty
marker or subjugation marker. At least 1 ground unit
must be placed in each Imperial system.
3 . The Rebel player receives 1 Corellian Corvette,
1 Rebel Transport, 2 X-wings, 2 Y-wings, 6 Rebel
Troopers, and 2 Airspeeders. These units can be
placed in the Rebel Base space of the game board
and/or in any one Rebel or neutral system.
4 . Each faction draws two random starting action cards
(i.e., the action cards without a recruit icon on them).
These cards provide special, once-per-game abilities
(see Action Cards on the right).
Players then resume the setup steps on page 5.
ACTION CARDS
Action cards provide special, hidden
abilities to leaders. During setup, each
player receives two random starting
action cards and places them facedown
near his faction sheet. Players can look
at their own action cards at any time.
The other starting action cards are
returned to the game box; they are not
used this game.
Each action card can be used once per game. When a
player wishes to use an action card, he flips the card
faceup, resolves its ability, and then returns it to the
game box.
Action cards used during a mission or combat can
only be used if one of the leaders shown on the card is
already in the system.
The bold phrase directly above the ability specifies
when the card can be used.
bb Assignment: The card is used during the
Assignment Phase. Instead of assigning a leader
to a mission, a player can flip the card faceup and
resolves its ability.
Start of Combat: The card is used immediately
after step 1 (Add Leader) of combat.
Immediate: The card must be used as soon as
the player gains the card, either during setup or
after choosing it when recruiting a leader. The
card is immediately revealed and resolved.
Special: The card is used when specified on the
card.
Players can gain additional action cards during the
Advance Time Marker step of the Refresh Phase.
When a player recruits a leader during this phase, he
places the chosen action card facedown near his faction
sheet, and he places the unchosen action card facedown
at the bottom of his action deck.

Use during either a combat
or a mission. Instead of rolling
up to 2 of your dice, place
them on the table showing
the results of your choice.
Action Card
 LFL  FFG
MON CALAMARI
Probe Card with
Rebel Loyalty
Star Wars: Rebellion can be even more fun with three
or four players. Up to two players can play on each
team, collectively controlling either the Galactic Empire or
the Rebel Alliance. Each player has certain responsibilities
and controls half of his factions leaders.
All rules in this booklet broadly apply to the team game
with the following exceptions:
CHOOSE ROLES
When choosing factions during setup, each player chooses
to play as either the Admiral or General for his team.
The Admiral and General each control different leaders
and have some slightly different responsibilities as
explained later. A player makes all decisions for his
leaders and rolls dice for them when resolving a mission.
Both players can activate systems and move his teams
ships and/or ground units.
FACTION SHEETS
When playing with more than two players, use the Team
Game side of each faction sheet. Each team has two
leader pools, and all leaders are placed in the leader pool
that matches their leader color (Admiral=blue;
General=orange).
During the Command Phase, players take turns following
the initiative number shown next to their roles name on
their faction sheet (starting with #1, then #2, etc.). During
a players turn, he can activate a system using one of his
leaders, reveal a mission that one of his leaders is
assigned to, or pass.
Grand Moff Tarkin
Admirals Leader
Initiative Number

COMMUNICATION
Players on the same team can share as much information as
they like. They can show each other cards without showing
the other team, but all discussion must take place openly in
front of their opponents. They can talk in code or whisper,
but they cannot leave the room to have private discussions.
ADMIRALS RESPONSIBILITIES
bb Recruiting: When recruiting new leaders during
the Refresh Phase, the Admiral draws two action
cards and decides which leader to recruit. When he
recruits a leader that belongs to the General (i.e.,
an orange leader), he gives that player the card and
leader to place in his leader pool.
bb Space Battles: The Admiral rolls dice, draws and
plays space tactic cards, and makes all decisions
during space battles.
bb Building and Deploying Units: The Admiral makes
all decisions when building and deploying units.
GENERALS RESPONSIBILITIES
bb Mission Cards: Both the Admiral and General can
assign their leaders to mission cards. The General
controls the hand of mission cards, and if players
disagree on assignments, he can disallow the
Admiral from assigning a leader to a mission.
bb Ground Battles: The General rolls dice, draws and
plays ground tactic cards, and makes all decisions
during ground battles.
bb Probes: The Imperial General is in charge of drawing
and managing the hand of drawn probe cards.
bb Objectives: The Rebel General is in charge of
drawing and managing the hand of objective cards.
He makes all decisions regarding which cards to
keep and when to play objective cards.
THREE-PLAYER GAME
During a three-player game, one player controls the Rebels
while the other two split control of the Imperials (one
Admiral, one General).
The Rebel player also uses the Team Game side of his
faction sheet. He has two turns each round, and he must
use his orange and blue leaders separately (as if playing a
four-player game).
TEAM GAME
STAR WARS: REBELLION
LEARN TO PLAY 19
QUICK REFERENCE
ROUND SUMMARY
This section lists an overview of a game round. The phrases
General only and Admiral only are used to denote which
player performs this step when playing a team game.
1 . Assignment Phase: Starting with the Rebels, each
player assigns leaders to missions.
2 . Command Phase: Players take turns revealing missions
or activating systems to move units.
3 . Refresh Phase
I. Retrieve Leaders: Return all leaders from the
game board to their leader pools.
II. Draw Missions: Each player draws two mission
cards, then discards down to 10 in hand.
[General only]
III. Launch Probe Droids: The Imperial player draws
two probe cards. [General only]
IV. Draw Objective: The Rebel player draws one
objective card. [General only]
V. Advance Time Marker: Advance the time marker
one space. Then recruit and/or build units based
on the icons in the time markers space.
i Recruit Icon: Each player draws two cards
from his action deck, chooses one to keep,
and recruits one leader shown on the card.
The other card is placed on the bottom of
the action deck. [Admiral only]
ii Build Icon: Each player places units on
the build queue for each of his loyal and
subjugated systems. [Admiral only]
VI. Deploy Units: Starting with the Rebels, each
player slides units one space down the build queue.
Any units that slide off the board are deployed in
the players loyal or subjugated systems or base
(limit 2 new units per system). [Admiral only]
COMBAT SUMMARY
This section lists an overview of the steps of combat.
1 . Add Leader: If a faction does not have a leader in the
system, that player may take a leader from his leader
pool and place it in the system.
2 . Draw Tactic Cards: Each player draws tactic cards
based on his leaders tactic values.
3 . Combat Round
I. Space Battle: Starting with the current player,
each player performs one attack with all of his
ships. [Admiral only]
II. Ground Battle: Starting with the current player,
each player performs one attack with all of his
ground units. [General only]
III. Retreat: Starting with the current player, each
player has the option to retreat from the system.
IV. Next Round: If both players still have units
in the same theater (space or ground), they
resolve another combat round. Otherwise,
the combat ends.
DICE REFERENCE
COMBAT MISSION

Deal 1 damage to a unit
with health matching this
dies color.
1 Success

Deal 1 damage to a unit
with black or red health.
1 Success

- Draw 1 tactic card or
play 1tactic card.
2 Successes
FIRST GAME STRATEGY
The multitude of options in Star Wars: Rebellion
may be overwhelming to some players, and this
guide should help direct those players for their
first game.
The Rebels have far fewer units than the
Imperials. Luckily, conquering the galaxy is not
their main path to victory. Even if most of their
units are destroyed, they can win the game by
keeping their base hidden and gaining reputation
from objective cards.
The Imperials ultimate goal is to find the Rebel
base. They can focus on either drawing lots of
probe cards (using Intel missions) or conquering
as many systems as possible in hopes of finding
the Rebel base.
After the Rebel base is found, the Death Star is
the ultimate weapon for winning the game. Early
in the game, the Death Star is nearly invincible,
but be sure to defend it with plenty of TIE
Fighters later in the game.



GAME NAME:
7th Continent

Explore. Survive. YOU are the Hero!
Rulebook
2
Object of the game ................................ 3
In short ........................................... 3
Card types ........................................4
Overview .........................................8
Setup ............................................9
Turn sequence ....................................10
Action resolution ................................. 11
Consequences of actions and events ................14
Life force  Action Deck and Discard Pile ............. 17
Exploring the continent ............................18
Not enough room to put a card into play .............19
Items ...........................................19
Saving the game ..................................21
Resuming the game ...............................21
Win or die! .......................................22
Leaving or joining a game in progress ................22
7 easily forgotten rules. ............................22
Definitions ....................................... 23
Credits .......................................... 23
Icons ............................................24
1907. A renowned explorer, you have just come back from the first expedition
on the seventh continent, a mysterious land that was recently discovered off
the coast of Antarctica and probably the very last terra incognita in the world.
You are recovering from your adventure when, whilst reading the daily newspaper,
you realize that several other members of the expedition have disappeared suddenly,
for unknown reasons.
Coincidentally, you have been lethargic for a few days, feeling feverish and finding
it difficult to get up from bed. A cold shiver runs up and down your spine.
You have to face the facts: an evil is consuming you from within.
At nightfall, you fall into a restless sleep without knowing that, for you, this is only
the beginning.

COMPONENTS:
- This rulebook
- 962 cards divided in different decks
 683 numbered Adventure cards
(with a green or gold back)
 135 Exploration cards (with a foggy back)
 118 Action cards (with a blue back)
 11 Character cards
 1 Satchel & Journal card
 4 Clue cards
 10 Save cards
- 7 explorer figures
- 4 fire figures (1 per player)
- 8 6-sided dice serving as durability counters for items
 within inventories
- 4 player aids
- 3 storing trays and 30 dividers to make it easier to find
  any card you need
- 1 magnifying glass to help you scrutinize all cards in play
- 1 double-sided holder for the Action cards Discard Pile

Table of contents
Read this before you set off for a new adventure
Contents
A game published by Serious Poulp
www.the7thcontinent.com
2017 SERIOUS POULP.
SERIOUS POULP, THE 7TH CONTINENT,
CHOOSE YOUR OWN PATH and their logos
are registered trademarks of SERIOUS POULP.
Learn the rules by
watching our video on
www.the7thcontinent.com

OBJECT OF THE GAME:
YOU HAVE BEEN CURSED!
To win the game, players must lift each and every curse
that they chose at the beginning of the game.
Do not worry  the game will clearly let you know
when this happens!
Note : this box contains the following curses:
The Voracious Goddess, The Bloody Hunt,
The Offering to the Guardians and The Dark
Chest of the Damned. Expansions contain more
curses that will add several hours of adventure
and fun. You may add the cards of an expansion
to the game even if you initially choose not to play
with the curse that it comes with.
The 7th Continent is a cooperative adventure, exploration
and survival board game, in which you play against the game
and try to lift the curses that have been placed on you.
You may take up the challenge on your own or in a team
of 2, 3 or 4 explorers.
Once you have selected your character, you will explore
the seventh continent by resolving Exploration cards and
putting numbered Adventure cards (Terrains and Permanent
events) into play, which will gradually form the Board.
During the game, players decide collectively and freely
which character will perform an action among those that
can be seen on the Terrain card their figure is standing on,
the Permanent event cards attached to that Terrain card,
and the cards he/she has in hand and in his/her inventory.
To take these actions, you will use an Action Deck that
represents the collective life force of your characters.
All actions work the same way: you must pay their
cost (the amount of energy needed to perform the
action) by drawing a minimum required number of cards
from the Action Deck, and obtain a minimum required
number of successes (depending on the actions
difficulty) to perform them successfully. These successes
appear in variable amounts on the cards you have just
drawn.
Then, you will apply the consequence of the action,
which depends on the success or failure of the action.
Failing at performing an action may have nasty consequences,
such as causing you to take negative State cards, which
may force you to discard cards from the Action Deck, thereby
reducing your life force.
Want to stack all the odds in your favor? You may choose
to draw more cards from the Action Deck to get more
successes. However, every card in the Action Deck is a bit
of your life force and when the Action Deck is exhausted,
so are you  then, every action might well be your last.
Thankfully, the Skill and Bonus cards you have
in hand, the Item cards in your inventory and the help
from your companions in misery will make things easier
for you, particularly by decreasing the cost of your actions
or by increasing your chances of success.
Unlike most board games, The 7th Continent will make you
experience one extended, non-stop adventure. It will take
several hours of exploration and adventure to lift each
curse or die trying. This is where the easy saving system
comes in so handy: you can stop playing at any time and
resume your adventure later on.
We recommend that your sessions run between one and
two hours, since some events  game/prey returning to be
hunted, for example  cannot happen unless you save the
game (as if you had camped for the night).
2+ 1
Fight action
Get 1 or more
successes
to succeed
Draw 2 or more cards
from the Action Deck
to perform the action
Note : as you play, you will discover that if you
want to beat the 7th Continent and lift your
curses, you will need to use your very best
survival skills  gather food (by hunting or
fishing, for instance) in order to regain some
life force, craft items to help you survive
dangerous situations, boost the Action Deck
with Advanced Skill cards you can gain by
spending the precious experience points you
have earned, and so on.
Apply this
consequence(s)
if you succeed
Apply this
consequence(s)

In short
Green or gold numbered cards include the terrains you will discover as you explore
the continent, the predefined events (places, encounters, etc.) you can trigger,
items you can find, as well as many more surprises to be discovered!
Card types
TERRAIN
Terrain cards are portions of the continent that remain in play on the Board.
A player may move their figure to a Terrain card, take the actions shown on it,
and use the resources shown on it to craft items at cheaper cost.
available action(s)
available resource(s)
Exploration card(s) to be put into play
in the space indicated by the arrow
TEMPORARY EVENT
Temporary event cards are discarded (unless stated otherwise) into the Past  the play
area into which players discard Adventure and Exploration cards  immediately after
they have been resolved.

PERMANENT EVENT
Permanent event cards remain in play on the Board after they have been revealed
(see a permanent event, p. 15). They are attached to the Terrain card in the
direction their placement arrow points.
placement arrow(s) (point(s) towards the
Terrain card the event is attached to)
performed action that has caused the event
to be put into play
flavor text
effect(s) and/or available action(s)
unique ID number
card number
flavor text
1. Adventure cards

Adventure card back
STATE
State cards are harmful cards that players add to their hands after obtaining them
along the adventure, generally when they fail at performing an action. In most cases,
how you can get rid of a State card is explained on the card.
card type  State/Character
title
taking this state causes a loss of vital force (see p. 16)
effect(s) and/or available action(s)
BONUS
Bonus cards are positive cards that players add to their hands after obtaining them
along the adventure, such as companions, positive states and side quests that
players can complete.
card type  Bonus
title
flavor text
effect(s) and/or available action(s)
keywords
card type  Item  and initial durability
title
flavor text
effect(s) and/or available action(s)
keywords
ITEM
Item cards are placed in the players inventories and help them perform certain actions
more easily or enable them to take new actions. They feature a die icon showing the
number of times the item can be used before it is destroyed.
QUEST ITEM
Quest item cards provide the players with helpful information and, in some cases,
enable them to use positive effects or take new actions. They are stored under
the Satchel & Journal card and the players may look at and read them at any time.
card type  Quest item
title
flavor text
effect(s) and/or available action(s)
keywords
Important! Card text overrides this rulebook.
Action cards include Skill cards and Curse cards.
Together, they form the Action Deck, that enables you to perform actions (see Action
resolution, p. 11) and represents the players life force (see Life force  Action Deck
and Discard Pile, p. 17).
Exploration cards are events that occur randomly as you explore the continent.
They can be permanent events, temporary events, found items, etc.
Each Exploration card belongs to the area of the continent represented by the
Roman numeral (I, II, III, IV, etc.) shown on the back of the card and on the Terrain
card it is attached to.
Note: the unique ID number of an Exploration card can be seen on its front, in the top-right corner.
area
placement arrows (point towards the Terrain
card that caused the Exploration card to be put
into play)
available action
2. Exploration cards
3. Action cards
SKILL
Skill cards enable you to craft helpful items
or benefit from positive effects.
CURSE
Curse cards decrease the odds that players perform an action
successfully (since they are worth zero success). They also cause
all players to lose when they get drawn from the Discard Pile
during the Cost step of an action while the Action Deck is empty.
card type  Curse
title
card type  Skill
title
purchasing cost
(Advanced Skills only)
successes the card generates
when revealed during the
Result step of an action
effect(s) of the skill
effect(s) of the item
(once it has been crafted)
keywords
unique ID number

Exploration card back
Action card back

Players start the game with this card, under which they will store any Quest item cards
acquired along the adventure.
Before the game begins, players select the Clue card(s) that correspond to the curse(s)
they wish to try and lift. Each clue provides a piece of information that helps solve the
curse it is associated with.
A clue is a Quest item card, so once selected, it is stored under the Satchel & Journal card
and the players may look at and read it at any time.
When you wish to save the game, use Save cards to store the cards that
are in the Action Deck and the Discard Pile and to keep track of the durability
of the items in all players inventories.
card type  Character/State

Character cards present the portraits and background stories of the explorers
that players personify. They also display the characters abilities.
4. Character cards
5. Satchel & Journal card
6. Clue cards
7. Save cards

Overview
ADVENTURE DECK
The Adventure Deck contains
all numbered cards with a green
or gold back. These cards may
be terrains, events, items, etc.
CHARACTER
FIGURES
EXPLORATION DECK
Exploration cards are random
events and may have a variety
of effects. Players must reveal
and resolve an Exploration card
before they can put the Terrain
card it hides into play and
therefore continue exploring
the continent.
SATCHEL & JOURNAL
All Quest item cards gained along
the adventure must be stored under
this card, which is shared by all players.
BOARD
Players build the Board
as they explore the continent
by putting face-up Terrain
and Permanent event cards
and face-down (foggy side up)
Exploration cards into play.
1 front of a Terrain card
2 back of an Exploration
card (foggy side)
3 front of a Permanent
event card
HAND
Each player has a hand that is empty at
the beginning of the game, except for their
Character card. A players hand may contain
a limited number of Skill and Bonus
cards (this number depends on player count 
see Satchel & Journal card) and an unlimited
number of State cards (however, no more
than 1 of each state type).
ACTION DECK
The Action Deck contains Skill
and Curse cards. Players pay
for the cost of the actions they take
by drawing cards from this deck.
All players use the same Action Deck.
Each player chooses a Character card and adds it to their hand
(remember to read the background story on the back).
Each player takes their characters figure and one fire figure.
Place the Satchel & Journal card face up in front of one player.
Optional  take a 777 card if you wish to play in easy mode,
or a 650 card if you wish to play in hardcore mode (see p. 22).
Each player takes a number of dice based on player count, as shown
on the Satchel & Journal card: 4 in solo / 3 with 2 players / 2 with
3-4 players.
Choose one or more Clue cards and store them under the Satchel &
Journal card. Return any unselected Clue cards. You may choose several
Clue cards if you wish to fight multiple curses at once. However, this
makes the game significantly harder, since you will need to lift all
the curses corresponding to these Clue cards to win the game.
Therefore, we do not recommend you to do so in your initial games.
Shuffle the following cards together to form the Action Deck:
 The 35 Skill cards that are common to all characters;
 The 5 Skill cards that are specific to each of the characters
taking part in the adventure (the characters portrait can
be seen on these);
 The Curse card(s) associated with the Clue(s) you have
selected (Curse and Clue cards have the same title);
 The 4 Curse cards titled Death is lurking!.
If you have it, assemble the Discard Pile holder and place it next to
the Action Deck.
Sort Exploration cards by area (I, II, III, IV, etc.) and then shuffle
each pile and store it behind the corresponding divider (I, II, III, IV, etc.)
in the game box, with the foggy side towards you.
Sort the and Adventure cards by ascending order ( 000 card
on top), then place them in the storing trays with their numbered backs
towards you, using the dividers [050, 100].
Important ! Green cards will always be placed before any gold cards
bearing the same number.
Take the Adventure card indicated on the Clue card you have chosen
(take the lowest numbered one if you have chosen multiple Clue cards),
read the flavor text at the back of the card and then put it into play to
form the Board. This Adventure card is the starting Terrain card of your
adventure. Place the figure of each character taking part in the adventure
on that card.
Place an Exploration card, foggy side up, next to each arrow
visible on the starting Terrain card, making sure that their text is
oriented the same way as on the other cards on the Board.
These Exploration cards must bear the same Roman numeral as the
Terrain card they are attached to.
Read out the introduction text Read this before you set off for
a new adventure (page 2) as well as the Clue card you have selected
(front AND back).
DISCARD PILE
The Discard Pile is where all Action
cards discarded during the game go to.
Players may freely look through the
cards in the Discard Pile as long as there
are cards left in the Action Deck.
All players use the same Discard Pile.
Important !
During setup, do not look at
the front of any Adventure cards
and Exploration cards.
You may look at all the other
cards freely.
Setup f
INVENTORY
Each player has their own inventory.
It is empty at the beginning of the
game and will contain the Item
cards they found or crafted.
Each player also has dice that
serve as durability counters for the
items they have in their inventory.
PAST
The Past is the area where all Adventure
and Exploration cards discarded during
the game go to.
Players may freely look through the cards
in the Past, which must be returned to
their respective original decks between
two game sessions.
All players use the same Past.
We recommend you to play against The Voracious Goddess
curse on your first game (starting on the 010 card, as indicated
on the curses Clue card).
the Terrain card 1 their figure is standing on;
an Exploration card 2 attached to the Terrain card
their figure is standing on;
a Permanent event card 3 attached to the Terrain card
their figure is standing on;
a Temporary event card 4 they have just revealed
(this action is mandatory);
a Skill, Bonus or State card they have
in hand; 5
an Item card in their inventory; 6
a Quest item card that is under the
Satchel & Journal card. 7
On each turn, one player is collectively chosen to be the active player (it may be the same player as on the last turn
if all players agree). If players cannot reach an agreement, the player to the left of the last active player becomes the
new active player.
Any player whose figure is on the same Terrain card as the active players may get involved in the action (if the active
player agrees) and thus use cards in their hand and/or inventory to help the active player.
::
:
:
:
: :
Important !
An action cannot be taken if:
another action is in progress;
it has a prerequisite that players cannot meet;
it has the icon and one or more players are not involved in it;
this action is visible in the placement arrow of a Permanent event card attached to the
Terrain card the players figure is standing on  this means that the action has already been performed and
cannot be performed again on this Terrain card.
When the active player reveals a mandatory action, the involved players must first finish resolving the
current action, and then immediately resolve that mandatory action.
:::
Turn sequence
The active player resolves the action of their choice among those visible (as an icon in a white square) on:
Choose the active player f
Check for other involved characters f
Once the action has been entirely resolved, a new turn begins.
Take an actionf
:
2
4 2
7
1
1
6
5
5
3
Important !
If the icon is associated with an
action, it cannot be performed unless
ALL characters get involved in it.
11
Each player involved in the action may use one or more items from their inventory,
by removing 1 pip from the value of the die resting on each used item (no matter how
many Item cards the item consists of). If that value reaches zero, the die is removed.
For each item used this way, the player will be able to apply  at most once during the
action  some or all of the effects of one or more Item cards it consists of, provided
a icon associated with the effect matches the current action.
An action is characterized by: an icon in a
white square, its X+ default cost, its Y
difficulty (minimum number of successes you
need to succeed), its consequences
if you succeed and, in general, its
consequences if you fail.
f
Dig action
Draw 6 or more cards from the Action Deck
to perform the action.
Get 1 or more successes to succeed.
Success  the active player takes
a 063 card.
Failure  each involved character
takes a 101 card.
a. The active player determines the cost of the action:
The default number of cards to draw from the Action
Deck (shown in the X+ blue diamond to the right
of the action icon);
If more than one player is involved in the action,
they may decide to lower the cost of the action by any
number ( -X cards to draw) and, on the other hand,
increase the difficulty of the action by the same amount
( +X required successes). This option is not available if
the icon is associated with the action;
Each player involved in the action may apply the effects
of one or more cards from their hand, of one or more
Item cards from their inventory used during step 1
(Item), of one or more Permanent event cards attached to
the Terrain card their figure is standing on, and/or of
one or more Quest item cards, in order to decrease the
number of cards to be drawn.
b. The active player draws a number of Action cards equal
to the final cost of the action and places them face down
in front of him/her.
The active player may draw additional Action cards
if they wish to boost their chances of succeeding,
unless the action has a icon.
Any such additional cards are placed face down
next to those previously drawn.
AN ACTION IS RESOLVED BY THE FOLLOWING SEQUENCE:
Important ! Usually, the active player must draw cards from the top of the Action Deck. If the Action Deck
is empty, the active player must shuffle the Discard Pile, place it face down and draw from it randomly instead.
In this case, if they reveal a Curse card drawn from the Discard Pile, the game ends immediately and
players lose (see Life force  Action Deck and Discard Pile, p.17).
1. ITEM
2. COST
Note : as a reminder
of which items you are
currently using, you may
move their die onto their
artwork.
Note : the cost of an action may be zero,
but never less than zero. In cases where
the cost is lowered below zero, consider it
to be zero.
:
:
:
6+
Action resolution
:
6+ 1 063 Each involved character takes a 101 card.
5
4
2 3 4 5
1
3
2
1
12
Now, the active player reveals all the cards drawn during step 2.b:
If a Curse card is revealed and it has been drawn from the Discard
Pile while the Action Deck is empty, the game ends immediately and
players lose.
Otherwise, total the successes you have obtained:
 Count the successes represented as full gold stars.
You may freely combine any half-stars visible on the revealed
cards as long as both their cards are facing the same way,
in order to construct full gold stars.
 Each player involved in the action may apply the effects of
one or more cards from their hand, of one or more Item cards from
their inventory used during step 1 (Item), of one or more Permanent
event cards attached to the Terrain card their figure is standing on,
and/or of one or more Quest item cards, in order to obtain additional
successes.
If the active player obtains at least as many successes as required
by the action, the action is a success. Otherwise, it is a failure.
Important !
Each icon shown on certain Item
and Skill cards is worth 1 success per
icon obtained during this step.
3. RESULT
:
:
4. SKILL
The active player may choose one Skill card among those revealed
during step 3 (Result).
They may add that card to their hand or to the hand of another player
involved in the action, even if the card exceeds the hand size limit.
The active player applies the consequence of the action,
depending on its result.
If the action is:
a success  they apply the effects shown in the white section;
a failure  they apply the effects shown in the black section.
If there is no such section, failing this action has no consequence.
Unless stated otherwise (e.g. each involved character),
the consequence of an action only applies to the active player.
The main consequences of actions are detailed on pages 14-15-16.
5. DISCARD
Discard all other and cards drawn during step 2 (Cost) into the Discard Pile.
Discard any Item cards that no longer have a die associated with them into the
Discard Pile (Action cards) or the Past (Adventure or Exploration cards).
7. HAND SIZE LIMIT
6. CONSEQUENCE
Any involved player who has more Skill and/or Bonus
cards in hand than the authorized limit must discard any
excess cards of their choice.
Important!
If a collective action (one with several involved
characters) is a failure, the active player must
take a 100 card  they become paranoid 
right after applying the consequence of the
action.
Important !
Any and icons in the left strip of
Skill cards are only taken into account
when these cards are revealed during this
step, not when they are in a players hand
or inventory.
Important !
A Skill card that is specific to a character
may only be added to that characters
hand.
A player may never add a Curse card
to their hand.
13
1+
1 2 3 4 5 6
5+
3+
7+
2+
6+
4+
55% 88% 97% 99% 99% 99%
6% 45% 75% 90% 97% 99%
2% 14% 39% 65% 82% 91%
2% 14% 34% 55% 72%
3%
1%
12% 27% 45%
4%
1%
11% 22%
3% 9%
Here are your chances of succeeding at performing an action*, depending
on its difficulty and the number of cards you draw during the Cost step:
Required
successes
Number of
cards drawn
*These figures  which are constant throughout all player counts  are based
on the number of successes (not the lucky 7 icons) shown on the 35 initial
Skill cards, that are common to all characters, and on each characters
5 specific Skill cards. They do not take Advanced Skill cards into account. 13
Example :
Bruno wants to take the following action:
Ludovic offers his help and Bruno agrees. Ludovic will then be able to use
cards from his hand and/or inventory in order to help Bruno.
Step 1: Bruno decides to use the shovel in his inventory, which will help him dig more
easily . He removes 1 pip from the value of the die resting on the Shovel card.
Step 2: Bruno decides to apply the effect of his shovel to draw 2 fewer cards,
-2 bringing the actions cost from 6+ 1 down to 4+ 1 .
Since they are performing the action collectively, Bruno and Ludovic decide to lower the number
of cards they must draw by -1 . As a result of this choice, they must increase the required
number of successes by +1 .
The action they are performing together is now 3+ 2 . Bruno draws 3 cards from the Action Deck
and places them face down in front of him.
Step 3: Bruno reveals the 3 cards drawn during the Cost step. The first card shows 1 right half of a gold star
and the icon. The second one is a Curse, which is worth zero success but has no other consequences,
since it was drawn from the Action Deck. The third card shows 1 left half of a gold star.
Bruno manages to couple both half-stars and obtains his first success.
His shovel brings him 1 success for each icon obtained during the Result step.
Bruno therefore obtains a second success.
Step 4: Bruno already has 3 Skill cards in hand, which is the character limit with 2 players, so he decides
to let Ludovic add one of the two revealed cards to his hand instead. In the end, Ludovic has obtained
a new skill by helping Bruno to dig!
Step 5: Bruno discards the card and the card that was not kept during the Skill step.
Step 6: since the number of successes obtained (2) is greater than or equal to the required number
of successes (2), the action is a success. Bruno therefore applies the consequence shown in the white section
by taking a 063 card.
6+ 1 063 Each involved character takes a 101 card.
14
A TERRAIN
The active player must put this card into play by placing
it on the Board where instructed by the card that enabled
them to take it, making sure that it is oriented the same
way as the other cards on the Board.
Once that Terrain card is in play, the active player must place new Exploration cards, foggy side up, in each free
adjacent space an arrow points towards. These new Exploration cards must bear the same Roman numeral as
the Terrain card they are attached to.
Note : the flavor text on the back
of the Adventure cards often
contains helpful details. Likewise,
the consequence texts of actions
and events are important.
Be sure to read them carefully!
Note : most Clue cards have
a purple banner
on the front, which is
crucial at certain moments
in the game to resolve
the corresponding quest.
:
Consequences of actions and events
Take a card summoned by a X X X numbox f When taking a numbered card as a consequence of an action or an event,
the active player must take it from the Adventure Deck.
If one or several cards match the number:
The active player randomly takes one of the green cards and then reveals it.
If there are none, they must take a gold card instead.
If no card with that number is available:
The active player must immediately return ALL the Adventure cards in the Past to their place in the Adventure Deck
and shuffle all the Exploration cards in the Past back into the Exploration Deck. They then take the newly available
card as explained above.
If several involved players are to take a numbered card:
The active player takes his/her card first and resolves it before the next involved player in clockwise order does the same.
If the numbox is associated with a banner:
When a numbox comes with a banner (blue or purple), the active player may either take a card matching the number in the
numbox, or take a card whose number is equal to the number in the numbox + the number associated with the pictograph in the
banner, provided one involved character is using an Item (by lowering its durability) or a Quest item card showing this pictograph
and the associated number.
Important !
A player may only take a gold card if there are no available green cards bearing the same number
in the Adventure Deck. If the only available card(s) has a gold back, make sure that a green card
bearing the same number can be found behind the The Past or the Banished cards divider. If not,
you might have put it in the wrong place.
Note : Terrain cards are generally put into play
when an Exploration card is replaced or as a
consequence of an event.
Putting a Terrain card into play does not cause
any figures to be moved automatically onto it.
ONCE THIS CARD HAS BEEN REVEALED, IF IT IS:
Example :
Bruno takes a swim/sail action,
the consequence of which is to take a 159 card.
Since Bruno has a raft in his inventory and it shows
a banner +5 , he may either take a 159 card,
or take a 164 card (159+5), if he used his raft
during the Item step.
XXX XXX
15
A PERMANENT EVENT
The active player must put this card into play by placing it on the Board, making sure that its placement arrow
points towards the Terrain card their figure is standing on and that the card is oriented the same way as the other
cards on the Board.
A TEMPORARY EVENT
The active player must resolve this event and then discard the card into the Past  or banish it if the card states so.
AN ITEM
The active player may:
 add this card to their inventory, placing a die on it or combining it with an existing item in their inventory
(see Combining an item, p. 20);
 or give this card to another player who was involved in the action, so that this player adds it to their own inventory;
 or discard this card into the Past if they do not wish to keep it.
The number of dice each player owns and the number of Item cards they may combine under a single die
(see Combining an item, p. 20) depends on the number of players.
A QUEST ITEM
The active player must slip this card under the Satchel & Journal card.
A SKILL or A BONUS
The active player may:
 add this card to their hand;
 or give this card to another player who was involved in the
action, so that this player adds it to their own hand;
 or discard this card into the Past if they do not wish to keep it.
Note : the action icon in the placement
arrow reminds you which action caused you to take
the card. As long as this card is in play, that action
may not be taken again from the Terrain card
to which the Event is attached.
:
:
:
:
:
This Permanent event is now attached to the Terrain card its
placement arrow points towards, meaning that any actions,
resources, and/or effects shown on the Event are now available
to any player whose figure is on the Terrain card it is attached to.
1 player: 4 items (dice), consisting of up to 4 Item cards each.
2 players: 3 items/player, consisting of up to 3 Item cards each.
3 players: 2 items/player, consisting of up to 3 Item cards each.
4 players: 2 items/player, consisting of up to 2 Item cards each.
Important !
If a temporary event shows a mandatory action, all players involved in the current action MUST
take it right after the current action has been resolved and no other player may get involved in it
(the active player remains unchanged).
16
A STATE
When a player reveals a State card, if the icon can
be seen on it, then they must immediately discard as
many cards from the top of the Action Deck as they have
Character/State cards in hand  unless an effect
prevents them from getting that state. If there are no
cards left in the Action Deck, the player randomly reveals
cards from the Discard Pile instead. In this case, if one of
the cards revealed from the Discard Pile is a Curse,
the game ends immediately and players lose. Otherwise,
all the revealed cards are shuffled back into the Discard
Pile (see Life force  Action Deck and Discard Pile, p. 17).
:
Note : there is no limit to the number of differently titled State cards a player may have in hand.
How one gets rid of a State card is usually explained on the card.
Example : Bruno has the following State cards in hand: paranoid and freezing. He takes an action and Ludovic
decides to get involved in it. The action is a failure and the consequence is Each involved character takes
a 104 card. Bruno takes a 104 card and gets injured. Since the icon can be seen on the revealed card,
Bruno immediately discards 3 cards from the top of the Action Deck (1 for his Character card, 1 for his
paranoid state, and 1 for his freezing state), then he adds the injured State card to his hand.
Ludovic too takes a 104 card. Since the icon cannot be seen on this card, he does not have to discard any
cards from the Action Deck. Ludovic adds the injured State card to his hand.
Since several players were involved in the action and it was a failure, Bruno, as the active player, must
take a 100 card and gets paranoid. The icon can be seen on the revealed card, so Bruno immediately
discards 4 cards from the top of the Action Deck (1 for each card he has in hand). Since he is already
paranoid, he returns the paranoid card he had in hand and replaces it with the paranoid card he has just taken.
Take a card not directly summoned by a numbox
Discard a card
f
f
The players may have to take a card in the Adventure Deck without the card being summoned by a straightforward
numbox  for instance when they find a hidden number (see Spotting a hidden number, p. 19), or add up the number
in a numbox with the number in a blue or purple banner, or solve a riddle, etc.
When this is the case, a ??? icon must be visible at the back of the card you take, ??? being the number of the card
that enabled you to take it. If that icon is not visible, then you must have taken the wrong card and must return it.
When the consequence of an action or event instructs you to discard a card, the active player must immediately put
that card into the Discard Pile if it is an Action card (blue back), or into the Past if it is either an Adventure card
(green or gold back) or an Exploration card (foggy back).
Note : if a player takes several State cards at once, they must resolve them one by one in the order  left
to right  they are referred to in the piece of text that instructed them to take these State cards.
The player must then add this card to their hand,
unless an effect prevents them from getting that state.
If they already have a State card with the same title
in hand, they must return it to the Adventure Deck
and replace it with the State card they have just taken.
If several players must take a state at the same time,
the active player does first (they return any state bearing
the same name from their hand, if applicable), then the
next concerned player in clockwise order and so on, until
all the concerned players have taken this state.
17
The Action Deck represents how much life force
the whole group of players has.
As long as there are cards in the Action Deck:
Players draw Action cards from the top of the
Action Deck. If they draw a Curse card,
this has no consequence.
Players discard Action cards into the Discard Pile,
which is face up and may be examined freely.
When an effect enables players to put cards back
into the Action Deck (either random or chosen cards,
depending on the effect), these cards are shuffled
back into it.
When the last card in the Action Deck is removed
(discarded or drawn):
Players must shuffle the Discard Pile and place
it face down.
As long as there are no cards left in the Action Deck:
During the Cost step of an action, the active player
shuffles the face-down Discard Pile and then randomly
draws Action cards from it. If they draw a Curse card,
the game ends immediately and players lose.
During the Discard step of an action, the active player
shuffles the Action cards back into the face-down
Discard Pile.
When players must discard cards from the Action
Deck (because of a icon on a newly taken state,
for example), they reveal cards from the Discard Pile
instead, before shuffling them back into it. If one
of these cards is a Curse, the game ends immediately
and players lose.
When an effect allows players to shuffle cards back
into the Action Deck from the Discard Pile, they re-form
the Action Deck with the corresponding cards. Players
will then resume drawing from the Action Deck as usual,
since it now contains cards again, and flip the
Discard Pile face up.
:
::
:
:
:
Example : Bruno has a shovel in his inventory and
Ludovic has a bow in his. They take an action together and fail.
The consequence of this failure is - . They decide to lower Brunos
shovels durability by - and Ludovics bows durability by - .
Brunos shovel is destroyed (the die is removed and the card is
discarded to the Discard Pile) and the bow now has a durability of .
Return a card
Move (a) character figure(s)
Lower item durability
Banish a card
f
f
f
f
When the consequence of an action or event instructs you to return a card, the active player immediately places that
card back in its original deck.
See Exploring the continent, p. 18-19.
The affected players (generally, the involved
players) must lower the value(s) of one
or more dice resting on Item cards in their
inventories by the indicated amount,
distributing that loss of durability in any
way they like across several items in several
inventories. When an item has a durability
of zero, it can no longer lose any and all the
cards forming the item must be discarded.
When the consequence of an action or event instructs you to banish a card,
the active player must immediately remove that card from play once and
for all by storing it behind the Banished cards divider in the box. All banished
cards will be returned at the end of the game (when players lose or win).
When this icon appears in the consequence of the action,
the active player must banish the green card where the icon can be seen
and then immediately replace it with a gold card bearing the same number.
Important !
If the consequence of an action instructs you
to banish a XXX card, you must banish a
green card from the Adventure Deck
if possible, without looking at it.
Life force  Action Deck and Discard Pile
-
:
:
18
An Exploration card is a random event that hides a portion of
the continent. You need to resolve an Exploration card
in order to remove it and put the Adventure card (generally
a Terrain card) that belongs there into play. This is how you
explore the continent.
Once the Exploration card has been resolved and discarded,
the active player must put a XXX Adventure card into play,
replacing the Exploration card.
The number of this Adventure card is shown in the numbox
associated with the arrow on the Terrain card that
points towards the newly opened space.
If that Adventure card is a Terrain card, the active player
must make sure that it fits with each adjacent Terrain card
like in a puzzle, and then put new Exploration cards into play
(foggy side up) in each free adjacent space to which an
arrow on the Terrain card is pointing. These new Exploration
cards must bear the same Roman numeral as the Terrain
card to which they are attached.
Example : there are 3 cards left in the Action Deck.
Bruno decides to take a 5+ 0 action.
He draws the first 3 cards from the Action Deck, which
becomes empty. He therefore sets these 3 cards aside,
shuffles the Discard Pile, flips it over face down and
randomly draws the remaining 2 cards from it.
He reveals a card, but luckily, it was drawn from
the Action Deck  not from the Discard Pile  so it has
no effect. Afterwards, he shuffles the cards that were
not kept back into the face-down Discard Pile.
Next, Ludovic takes a 0+ 0 action, the consequence
of which is to randomly take 6 cards from the Discard
Pile and shuffle them back into the Action Deck. Thereby,
he forms the Action Deck anew with these 6 cards.
Example : 1 Bruno performs the pathfind action
and applies its consequence by flipping the Exploration card over.
2 It is an Item card, which he chooses to add to his inventory.
3 The space the Exploration card used to occupy is now open,
so Bruno takes the 009 Adventure card, associated with the arrow
visible on his Terrain card, and puts it into play in the newly opened
space. From now, he will be able to move to this new Terrain card
by performing the move action.
Note : if a player has to draw or discard
more Action cards than there are
in the Action Deck, they carry out
the steps described above, drawing cards
from the Action Deck until it is empty,
then shuffling the Discard Pile and drawing
the remaining cards from the Discard
Pile. In this case, if they reveal a Curse
card that was drawn from the Discard Pile,
the game ends immediately and
players lose.
Note : an Exploration card
may be a permanent or
temporary event, an item,
a bonus, etc. If it is a
permanent event, it remains
in play (making it impossible
to discover the terrain
it hides) until it is resolved
and discarded.
Exploring the continent
Opening the space occupied by an Exploration card f
1
2
3
19
The active player may take a action
visible on the Terrain card their figure is standing on,
in order to apply the following consequence: ,
meaning All involved characters move their
figure to the same reachable Terrain card.
A reachable Terrain card is one that is connected to
the active players Terrain card by an uninterrupted series
of Terrain cards (no matter how many there are).
It may happen that some permanent events (cliff, raging
river, bottomless pit, etc.) showing several placement
arrows separate two Terrain cards. In this case, these events
feature an action whose consequence is to move the figures
to the Terrain card on the other side of the obstacle.
Some Terrain and Permanent event cards contain hidden numbers. When players find one, they may
discard the card on which they spotted it and replace it with the card bearing that number.
When there is not enough room on the table to put a card
into play, all characters must meet on the same Terrain card
and then players must return the Terrain cards of their
choice, along with the Permanent event cards attached to
them, making sure that all remaining Terrain cards are
reachable. The remaining cards are repositioned to
the center of the table.
If applicable, players must put new Exploration cards
into play in every empty adjacent space an arrow
on a Terrain card points towards.
When a player reveals an Adventure or Exploration card with
the die icon, they may add it to their inventory or give it
to another involved player, so that this player adds it to
their inventory instead (see Consequences of actions and
events  An item, p. 15).
Example :
on the 054 Terrain card, Ludovic has spotted
the hidden number 316.
He discards the 054 card and replaces it
with the 316 card, on the back of which
he can see the following icon .
legal
movement
illegal movement
because of the
interrupting Event card
Note : some cards refer to the cardinal points;
North, South, East and West. In this regard
assume card text and icons are orientated to
be read from west to east.
Note : a hidden number is always made
of 3 digits. On the back of the card
matching the hidden number,
you should see the number of the
card on which you spotted it. ???
Moving to another Terrain card
Spotting a hidden number
Finding an item
f
f
f
054
Items
Not enough room to put a card into play
Important !
If a mandatory action can be seen on a Terrain card, players whose figures arrive onto that card
must immediately take it (collectively if applicable), unless it can no longer be taken.
20
The craft action available on certain Skill cards
enables you to turn that Skill card from your hand into
an Item card that goes into your inventory or another
involved players inventory.
The items you can craft are made of resources.
When these resources are available on your Terrain card
or on a Permanent event attached to it, you may reduce
the number of cards to be drawn during the Cost step of
the craft action by -X as shown on the Skill card
under each relevant resource icon.
When an Item card is found or crafted, the player may
combine it with an existing item in their inventory
in order to form one single item, without exceeding the
allowed stacking limit, which depends on player count
(as shown on the Satchel & Journal card). In this case,
the newly combined Item card is placed at the bottom of the
column it is added to, in last position, making sure that the
lower part of the card remains visible (effects and keywords).
If the newly combined Item card shares at least one keyword
with the Item card the die is resting on (at the top of the
column), its durability value is added to the value of that die
(to a maximum of 6).
Once the craft action has been successfully performed, the active player may:
create a new item by adding the Item card to their inventory and placing a die on it, that show the face matching
the initial durability of the item;
or combine the Item card with an existing item in their inventory (see Combining an item below);
or give this card to another player who was involved in the action, so that this player takes one of the two options above.
Crafting an item
Combining an item f
Note : you may craft an item even if the
resources it is made of are not available.
When there is a fire figure on your Terrain card,
you have the fire resource.
Note : the interest of combining Item cards
is threefold: having more cards in your
inventory, making the initial item more
efficient/versatile and increasing its
durability.
wood stone foliage vine bamboo bone poison fire
Example :
the wood resource is available on this Terrain card.
The number of cards to be drawn to craft a raft is
therefore 5 (default cost of the action) 3 (wood resource)
= 2. Had the vine resource been available on this terrain
too, the cost of the craft action would have been 0.
Example :
Bruno has a walking stick in his
inventory. He decides to craft a bow.
He may either put a die on the Bow card to create a new item, or combine
the walking stick and the bow by sliding the Bow card underneath the Walking stick
card. In this case, since both the Bow card and the Walking stick card have
the keyword will, the value of the die resting on the Walking stick card increases
by as many pips as the durability of the bow. This gives a total of 8, brought down to ,
which is the maximum possible durability for an item.
:::
A player may relinquish an item from their inventory at any
time. In this case, the die is removed from it and all the cards
it was consisting of are discarded.
It is not allowed to deconstruct an item voluntarily by just
discarding one card from an item that is made up of multiple
cards, unless it is part of the effect of the Item card
(e.g.: the Bolas are discarded after use).
Relinquishing an item f
f
21
Players may suspend and save the game at any time,
as long as all character figures are on the same Terrain card
and no player is performing an action or forced to take
a mandatory action.
1. Discard all the cards on the Board into the Past, except
for the Terrain card all characters figures are standing on.
2. Stack the remaining cards in the following order
(from the bottom up) and put them behind the Save
divider in the game box:
a. for each character, his/her Character card, with
the following cards underneath:
i. all , and cards he/she has in hand;
ii. for each item in their inventory, one Save
card (oriented in such a way that the durability
of the item appears in the upper part of the card)
with the cards that the item consists of
underneath it;
b. the Discard Pile Save card, with all the cards in the
Discard Pile underneath it;
c. the Action Deck Save card, with all the cards in the
Action Deck underneath it;
d. the Satchel & Journal card, with all the Quest
item cards stored under it;
e. the Terrain card where figures were standing.
When you resume a game after suspending it:
1. Return all the cards in the Past to their place in their
respective original deck (Adventure or Exploration);
2. Put the saved Terrain card back into play. Place the
figures of all characters taking part in the adventure onto
it and one Exploration card in front of each arrow;
3. Put the Satchel & Journal card back into play, with
the cards it contains underneath it;
4. Put the Action Deck back into play;
5. Put the Discard Pile back into play;
6. Each player takes all their , and cards
back in hand;
7. Each player puts the items from their inventory
back into play, setting each items die to the value
shown in the upper part of the items Save card;
8. Return all Save cards to the game box.
Youre now ready to go again!
A player may use an item in their
inventory  by lowering its durability
by 1  either to apply some or all
of the the items effects when they
are involved in an action to
which the items effect applies, or
to take an action featured on this item.
Using an item enables the player
to freely choose to apply some or
all of the effects of one or more
Item cards it consists of.
Using an item fExample : the empty can is a found item
that helps you when you craft or dig .
The rudimentary flint is a Skill card that
enables you to craft the Rudimentary flint
item. Once crafted, this item enables you to take
the make fire action.
Resuming the game
Saving the game
Characters that are on the same Terrain card may freely give
or swap one or more full items (i.e. all the Item cards the item
consists of) to/with one another.
However, they must discard 2 cards from the Action Deck
every time an item is given or two items are swapped.
A player may not combine an item they receive from
another player with another item in their inventory.
Giving or swapping an item f
22
YOU WIN!
The game ends and players win collectively if they manage
to lift all the curses they had chosen to fight at the beginning
of the game. The game will clearly let you know when
this happens.
EASY MODE
If you are more into exploring than surviving, you may
choose to play in easy mode. In that case, take a 777
card before you begin the game.
HARDCORE MODE
Even if you manage to lift a curse, you can still try and play
with it again later in hardcore mode. If you feel up to it,
take a 650 card before you begin the game.
ELIMINATED CHARACTER
A character is eliminated if the applicable consequence
of an action they are involved in states Your adventure
is over.
In this case, the player must:
discard all the Skill and Bonus cards they have
in hand;
discard all the Item cards in their inventory
(they may not swap and/or give them with/to
another player);
return all the State cards they have in hand and
banish all Skill cards showing their character's
face (whether they are in the Action Deck or in the
Discard Pile).
The player may continue the adventure with a new character
(see Join a game in progress below).
YOU LOSE
The game ends immediately and players lose collectively
if one of the following occurs:
a player reveals a Curse card drawn or revealed
from the Discard Pile while the Action Deck is empty;
the applicable consequence of an action all characters
are involved in states Your adventure is over.
Every time you put a Terrain card into play, place
an Exploration card (foggy side up) in each free adjacent
space an arrow points towards.
A player may craft an item even if the resources it is
primarily made of are not available. The resources being
present simply makes it easier to craft the item.
When a player applies the consequence, the Terrain
card they want to move their figure to must be
connected to their current Terrain card by an
uninterrupted series of Terrain cards.
Leaving a game in progress
If the player leaves for good, apply the eliminated
character rule.
Otherwise, the player must save their cards, after swapping
items with the other players if they wish to, and must then
return all those of their character-specific Skill cards that
are in the Action Deck and/or the Discard Pile (those in their
hand and/or inventory are saved, not returned).
Any of this characters character-specific Skill cards that
are in another players inventory will not be returned until
they are discarded, unless the character has joined the game
again by then.
Joining a game in progress
A player can easily join a game in progress or continue
the adventure with their group if their character
was eliminated.
To do so, they choose any character they want to be,
take the corresponding Character card and shuffle the
5 Skill cards specific to this character into the Action
Deck. Immediately apply the new hand and inventory size
limits, by discarding any excess cards and/or items in each
players hand and/or inventory.
The new characters figure is placed onto the same Terrain
card as the other figures.
1. 4.
2.
5.
3.
6.
:
Win or die !
Leaving or joining a game in progress
7 easily forgotten rules
:
:
:
Players may always draw more cards than required
by the action, unless the action is locked.
Success and Lucky 7 icons in the left strip
of Skill cards are only ever taken into account when these
cards are revealed during the Result step of an action.
During each action, at most one involved player may
take in hand at most one Skill card, regardless of
the number of cards drawn and the number of players
involved.
If more than one player is involved in an action that
is a failure, the active player must take a 100 card 
therefore becoming paranoid  right after applying
the consequence of the action.
7.
:
23
Original design: Ludovic Roudy and Bruno Sautter
Artwork: Ludovic Roudy
Rules proofreading: Samuel Buggia, Jean-Franois Jet, Pierre Gamberoni
Cards proofreading: Pierre Gamberoni, Wladimir Kokkinopoulos, Malika Bellony
English translation: Pierre Gamberoni
English cards and rules proofreading: Jack Francisco, Elizabeth Sheeter
Special thanks to our families, friends and playtesters.
And a warm thank you to all 12,103 backers
who made this adventure possible!
This game is humbly dedicated to
Without their inspirational work, our lives
would certainly have been very different.
Gary Chalk
Joe Dever
Didier Guiserix
Gary Gygax
Steve Jackson
Ian Livingstone
Action Deck: contains the blue Action
cards that players draw to perform actions.
Active player: the player whose turn
it is (the one who takes an action).
Advanced Skill cards: new Skill
cards that players can purchase
at certain moments in the adventure
(the game will let you know when
you can) by spending the experience
points they have earned.
Adventure Deck: contains the green
and gold numbered Adventure cards.
Banish: remove a card from play once
and for all. The card goes into the game
box, behind the Banished cards
divider and will be returned at the end
of the game, after the players have
won or lost.
Board: the area formed by the Terrain
and Permanent event cards that are
in play.
Bonus cards: positive cards that
players obtain along the adventure
and hold in hand.
Character: a character played by
a player. Character is very often
synonymous for player.
Clue cards: cards that players choose
before they begin the adventure and
that provide a hint as to how to lift the
corresponding curse.
Cost: the minimum number of Action
cards that must be drawn to perform
the action.
Curse cards: cards from the Action Deck
that can cause players to lose (see
Vital force  Action Deck and Discard
Pile, p. 17).
Discard: move an Action card
(blue back) to the Discard Pile or an
Adventure/Exploration card to the Past.
Discard Pile: the play area into which
players discard Action cards (blue back).
Draw: take the top card(s) of the
Action Deck.
Durability: the number of times an
item can be used before it is destroyed.
Experience points: Adventure cards
whose effect allows players to spend
experience points at certain moments in
the game to purchase Advanced
Skill cards.
Exploration Deck: contains the
Exploration cards (foggy back) that
players must resolve/discard to
continue exploring the continent.
Hand: the Skill, Bonus and
State/Character cards a player has
in hand.
Inventory: the play area in which a
player places their Item cards.
Involved character: a player who takes
an action or a character that is involved
in an action taken by another player.
Item cards: cards in the inventory
that were crafted or found along the
adventure. They can be used to apply
their effect(s).
Keyword: word that can be seen at the
bottom of certain cards, that some
actions and effects may refer to.
It is also used for item combination
(see p. 20).
Numbox: the dark-green icon in which
the number of a card can be seen.
Past: the play area into which players
discard Adventure (green or gold back)
and Exploration cards (foggy back).
Purchasing cost: the number of
experience points that must be spent
to purchase an Advanced Skill card.
Quest item cards: cards that provide
players with information and effects
that help them in their quest. They are
stored under the Satchel & Journal
card and players may look through
them at any time during the game and
use them at will.
Resource: a component (wood, stone,
bone, etc.) available on a Terrain card,
Permanent event card, etc., that
can lower the cost of the craft action.
Return: put a card back to its place in
its original deck (in the Adventure
Deck, sort cards by number and green
cards always come before any gold
cards bearing the same number).
Satchel & Journal: the card under
which players store any Quest item
cards they obtain.
Skill cards: cards with which players
begin the adventure. There are 35 Skill
cards common to all characters and
5 Skill cards specific to each character,
which only that character may take
in hand.
State cards: harmful cards that
players obtain along the adventure
and hold in hand.
Successes: icons needed to succeed
at performing an action.
Terrain card: a card that represents
a portion of the continent.
This: designates the card you are
reading.
Definitions
Credits
DECKS
Action cards
Adventure cards
Exploration cards
CARD TYPES
A Curse card
A Skill card
A State or Character card
A Bonus card (companion,
positive state, side quest)
An Item card whose durability
is equal to the value of the die.
A Quest item card
(to be stored underneath
the Satchel & Journal card).
A Temporary event that must
be resolved immediately
and then discarded.
A Permanent event that must
be put into play, oriented in
the same way as the other
cards on the Board, with its
placement arrow pointing
to the Terrain card your figure
is standing on. It is then
considered to be attached
to that Terrain card.
The purchasing cost
(in experience points)
of an Advanced Skill card.
ACTIONS
An action players may take
(see Action resolution, p. 11).
This action has already been
performed and cannot be
performed again from the
Terrain card this Permanent
event card is attached to.
All players involved in
the current action must take
this action collectively.
Other players may not get
involved in it.
The related effect may only
be applied during an action
of this type (if the character
is involved in it).
Players may not alter the
default cost of the action
(the number of cards to be
drawn imposed by the action),
unless they use the effects of
cards from their hands and/or
inventories.
An action all players must get
involved in (the consequence
of this action might force them
to discard all the cards forming
the current Board and reset
somewhere different).
When players are on a Terrain
card showing this icon,
they are not allowed to take
the following actions:
make fire, craft
and rest.
The default cost of the action,
i.e. the minimum number
of cards to be drawn to take
the action.
The number of cards that
players may subtract
(i.e. they need not draw them)
from the action cost during
the Cost step of an action
they are involved in.
The difficulty of the action,
i.e. the minimum number
of successes (full gold stars)
you must obtain to perform
it successfully.
One success that must
be added to your total during
the Result step of an action
the player is involved in.
For each obtained during
the Result step of an action
the player is involved in,
the icon is worth .
Is worth 1 success for each
icon obtained during the Result
step of an action the player is
involved in. If there are no
icons, this icon is worth zero
success.
The consequence that must
be applied if the action is
a success.
The consequence that must be
applied if the action is a failure.
ACTION CONSEQUENCES
AND CARD EFFECTS
Take a card bearing this number
from the Adventure Deck
(green by default; gold only
if no green card is available).
This icon is referred to as a
numbox.
Once it has been resolved,
discard this Exploration card
and replace it with an Adventure
card that belongs there.
Banish this green card
and replace it with a gold card
bearing the same number.
All involved characters move
their figure to the same
reachable Terrain card.
You may add together
the number associated with
the pictograph in this banner
and the number of the card
you are to take.
Unless otherwise stated,
the involved characters must
remove a total of X pips,
as chosen by themselves,
across the values of the dice
resting on their items.
When an items durability goes
down to zero, it is discarded.
The player must discard
1 card from the top of the
Action Deck for each
they have in hand.

Listen to
the games original
soundtrack on
www.the7thcontinent.com/music



GAME NAME:
Puerto Rico

Prospector, captain, mayor, trader, settler, craftsman, or builder?
Which roles will you play in the new world? Will you own the most
prosperous plantations? Will you build the most valuable buildings?
You have but one goal: achieve the greatest prosperity and highest respect!
This is shown by the player who earns the most victory points?
GOAL:
The game is played over several rounds. In each round, each player
chooses one of seven different roles and, thereby, offers all players, in
clockwise order, the action associated with that role.
So, for example, with the settler, players can place new plantations, on
which, with the help of the craftsman, players can produce goods. Players
can then sell these goods to the trading house with the trader or, with the
captain, ship them to the old world. With the money earned from such
sales, the players. with the builder, may build buildings in the city, and so
on.
The player who best manages the changing roles with their associated
actions and special privileges, will achieve the greatest prosperity and the
highest respect and, thereby, win the game.
The winner is the player who earns the most victory points.
COMPONENTS:
- 5 player boards each has 12 island spaces and 12 city spaces as well as a summary of the 7 roles
- 1 governor card indicates the starting player of the round
- 8 role cards one each of settler, mayor, builder, craftsman, trader, and captain; and 2 prospectors
- 1 game board for the various buildings and the money
- 49 buildings
- 5 large violet buildings (2 spaces),
- 2 each of 12 small violet buildings, and
- 20 non-violet production buildings
- 54 doubloons 46 @ 1 and 8 @ 5
- 58 island tiles 8 quarry tiles and 50 plantation tiles: 8 coffee,
- 9 tobacco, 10 corn, 11 sugar, and 12 indigo
- 1 colonist ship for the colonists
- 100 colonists brown round wooden markers
- 1 trading house for selling goods
- 50 goods 9 of coffee (dk brown) and tobacco (lt brown),
- 10 of corn (yellow), 11 of sugar (white)
  and indigo (blue) wooden barrels
- 5 cargo ships for sending goods to the old world
- 50 VP chips hexagonal chips: 32 @ 1 and 18 @ 5
ANDREAS SEYFARTH
GOAL:
The players go from round to
round in different roles and
initiate the associated actions.
Players place plantations and
build buildings. They produce
goods and then sell or ship
them.
The player with the most
points at game end is the
winner!
The text in the sidebars both summarizes the rules and offers information about specific special circumstances
which may occur. We recommend you read through the main rules before reading the information in the sidebars.
 all 8 quarry tiles (face-up)
 all remaining plantation tiles
(well shuffled in 5 face-down stacks)
 4, 5, or 6 plantation tiles (one more than the number of
players) are taken from the face-down stacks and placed
face-up next to the quarry tile stack.
 the victory point chips (in 2 separate piles):
- with 3 players: 75 points
- with 4 players: 100 points
- with 5 players: all 122 points
 the role cards
- with 3 players: all cards except
both prospectors (= 6 cards)
- with 4 players: all cards except
one prospector (= 7 cards)
- with 5 players: all 8 cards
 three cargo ships
- with 3 players: the ships with
4, 5, and 6 cargo spaces
- with 4 players: the ships with
5, 6, and 7 cargo spaces
- with 5 players: the ships with
6, 7, and 8 cargo spaces
 all goods
(in 5 separate piles)
 the trading house
 the colonist ship
with 3, 4 or 5 colonists, depending
on the number of players
 the brown colonist markers
(as supply pile)
- with 3 players: 55 colonists
- with 4 players: 75 colonists
- with 5 players: 95 colonists
Place unused material back in the box.
PREPARATION
Place the game board in the middle of the table. Place all the buildings on their assigned spaces on the game
board (see below).
Sort the doubloons by value and place them on the bank on the game board (see below).
Each player takes:
 1 player board (placed before him on the table)
 money:
- with 3 players: 2 doubloons - with 4 players: 3 doubloons - with 5 players: 4 doubloons
The players store their doubloons on the windrose on their player boards, so that all players can see how much
money each player has.
 1 plantation tile. First, the players choose a starting player using any method they choose. This player takes
the governor card and a blue indigo tile (which he places face-up on any of the 12 spaces on his island). The
other players take the following in clockwise order:
- with 3 players: 2nd player: indigo / 3rd player: corn
- with 4 players: 2nd player: indigo / 3rd and 4th players: corn
- with 5 players: 2nd and 3rd players: indigo / 4th and 5th players: corn
Place the remaining material as shown in the below illustration:
(note: the illustration below is for a 4 player game)
PLAYING THE GAME:
The governor begins and
chooses a role card; all players
take the associated action, in
clockwise order.
The next player chooses a role
card and all players take the
associated action as before.
At the end of the round, place
1 doubloon on the unused role
cards.
The governor card goes to the
next player in clockwise order,
and the game continues.
THE ROLES
- every player is allowed to
take the action associated
with the role (exception:
prospector)
- the privilege associated with
the role may only be used by
the player taking the role
card
action:
each player takes
and places a
plantation tile
privilege:
the settler may
take and place a
quarry, instead
at the end of the settler phase:
new plantation tiles are drawn
3
PLAYING THE GAME:
The game is played over several rounds (about 15). Each round is played in
the same way. The player with the governor card begins. He takes one of
the role cards, places it face-up next to his player board, and takes the
action allowed by the role card. Then, his left neighbor takes the action
allowed by that role card, and so on around the table, in clockwise order,
until every player has taken this action once.
Next, the left neighbor of the governor takes his turn: he takes one of the
remaining role cards, places it face-up next to his player board, and takes
the action allowed by the role card. Then, his left neighbor takes the action
allowed by that role card, and so on around the table, in clockwise order,
until every player has taken this action once. Then, his left neighbor takes
a role card, and so on until all players have taken a role card and all players
taken the actions allowed by the role cards taken.
Next, place one doubloon on each of the three role cards that were not
taken by a player during the round. Then, place the used role cards back
on the table next to the unused cards. The left neighbor of the player with
the governor card takes the governor card, becoming the governor for the
next round. He begins the round and the game continues as before.
THE ROLES:
Each role grants the player who takes the card a special privilege, and also,
a specific action that can be taken by each player, in clockwise order,
starting with the player who took the role (exception: prospector).
Basic rules for all role cards:
- If a card has one or more doubloons on it, the player who takes the card
gets the doubloons in addition to the privilege and action associated
with the card.
- The action associated with a role card is always taken first by the player
who took the card, followed by the others in clockwise order.
- A player must always take a role card when it is his turn to do so, but he
may choose not to use the action or privilege of the card he choses. The
other players, of course, get their turns at the action of the card.
- The action of a role card is optional (exception: captain). A player may
choose not to or be unable to use the action on his turn.
- A role card remains in front of the player who took it until the end of
the round. It may not be taken by another player in the round.
THE SETTLER (settler phase k place a new plantation on the island)
The player who chooses this role may take either a quarry tile as his
privilege or one of the face-up plantation tiles and place it on any empty
island space on his player board. Afterwards, each other player, in clockwise
order, may take one of the face-up plantation tiles (not a quarry tile! -
exception: construction hut) and place it on any empty island space on his
player board.
Finally, the settler player puts the untaken plantation tiles face-up on a
plantation discard stack and draws new plantation cards from the facedown
stacks, placing them face-up next to the quarry stack. He draws one
more than the number of players.
Notes:
- Remember the special functions of the hacienda, construction hut, and hospice.
- If there are not enough plantation tiles left in the face-down stacks, the player first
draws and places those. He shuffles the discarded plantation tiles face-down, creates
a new face down stack, and fills the face-up row. If there are insufficient tiles to refill
the face-up row, players in following rounds may have to do without.
- Where a player places quarry and plantation tiles on his island plays no role in the
game. The tiles may not be removed from the island.
action:
each player takes
and places
colonists
privilege:
the mayor may take
one additional
colonist
example for 4 players
mayor
2nd player
3rd player
4th player
mayor
2nd player
The mayor takes 3 colonists, the
second player 2, and players 3 and
4 take 1 each.
Each player may place all his
colonists on new empty circles.
At the end of the phase, the
mayor places new colonists on
the colonist ship.
action:
each player may
build a building
privilege:
the builder pays
one less doubloon
- If a player has filled all 12 island spaces on his player board, he may not place
plantation or quarry tiles in future settler phases.
- If there are no more quarry tiles in the quarry tile stack, the settler may not use his
privilege and the owners of a construction hut may not use that special function.
THE MAYOR (mayor phase k arrival of new colonists)
The tiles (plantation, quarry, or building) have 1 to 3 circles. A player may
place one colonist on each circle on the tiles on his player board. If there is
at least one colonist on a tile, it is considered occupied. Only occupied tiles
may use their functions; unoccupied tiles never function!
The player who chooses this role may first take one colonist from the
colonist supply (not from the colonist ship!) as his privilege. Next, the players
take the colonists from the colonist ship one at a time, starting with the
mayor. The players continue to take one colonist at a time, in clockwise
order, until none remain on the colonist ship.
A player may place his new colonist(s), together with all the colonists he
acquired from earlier rounds, on any empty circles on the tiles on his
player board. Thus, a player may move a colonist placed on a circle or San
Juan in an earlier round. If a player cannot place all his colonists,
he may store them on the small city of San Juan on his player
board. The colonists remain there until a later mayor phase when
they may be placed on empty circles on the players tiles.
As his last duty, the mayor puts new colonists on the colonist
ship to be used in the next mayor phase. For each empty circle
on the buildings on the player boards of all players (empty circles on
plantations and quarries do not count!), the mayor takes one colonist from
the colonist supply and places it on the colonist ship. However, as a
minimum, the mayor should always place at least as many colonists on the
ship as there are players in the game.
Notes:
- Usually, all players place/move their colonists at the same time. If, however, the
players feel that their placement decisions may depend on others placements, the
players should place their colonists is the following order: first, the mayor and, then,
the others in clockwise order from the mayor.
- If a mayor forgets (players may remind him) to place new colonists on the colonist
ship, players later place the minimum (number of players) on the colonist ship.
- When the colonist supply runs out, the mayor may not use his privilege and, of
course, he does not refill the colonist ship.
- No player may choose to place colonists in San Juan if he has empty circles
available on his player board. All empty circles must be filled, if possible. Colonists
may not be placed on the circles other than in the mayor phase.
THE BUILDER (builder phase k build buildings)
The player who chooses this role, can immediately build one building for
one doubloon less than the normal cost as his privilege. He pays the money
to the bank, takes the building from the supply, and places it
on any empty space in the city on his player board. When
placing a large building, the player needs two adjacent
empty spaces. Then, the other players, in clockwise order
from the builder, may, in the same way, each builds one
building (at normal cost).
Note: No player may build more than one building per round.
Further information on the individual buildings is at the end of the rules.

Quarry
Each occupied quarry that a player owns may reduce the players cost for
building a building by 1 doubloon. The limit for such reductions is shown
on the game board: players building buildings in the first column can
reduce their cost by at most 1 doubloon (1 occupied quarry), in the second
column by at most 2 doubloons (2 occupied quarries), in the third column
by at most 3 doubloons (3 occupied quarries), and in the fourth column by
at most 4 doubloons (4 occupied quarries). The mayors privilege
reduction is in addition to the quarry reduction, but the cost of a building
may not be reduced below 0 doubloons. A player with 3 occupied quarries
pays the following costs: construction hut: 1 doubloon; office: 3 doubloons;
harbor: 5 doubloons; city hall: 7 doubloons.
Notes:
- Remember the special function of the university.
- If the builder does not build a building, he does not take 1 doubloon for his privilege!
- It is not possible to build on more than 12 city spaces. A player who has no empty
city spaces may not build more buildings.
THE CRAFTSMAN (craftsman phase k production of goods)
The player who chooses this role, takes goods from the supply according to
his production ability and places them on the windrose on his player
board. Thus, the windrose contains a players money and goods. Next, the
other players take goods from the supply according to their abilities, in
clockwise order from the craftsman.
See more details on production abilities under The production buildings.
As his last duty, the craftsman takes one additional good (of those he can
produce) from the supply as his privilege.
Notes:
- Remember the special function of the factory.
- If the kind of goods a player produces is exhausted in the supply, he goes without.
- If the craftsman does not produce goods, he does not get an extra good (privilege).
THE TRADER (trader phase k selling goods)
The player who chooses this role, may immediately sell one good
to the trading house. He takes from the bank the price associated
with the good he sold (0 - 4 doubloons) plus 1 doubloon as his
privilege. Then, in clockwise order from the trader, each other
player may sell one good to the trading house for the price
shown as long as there is room for it in the trading house. The
trader phase ends when all players have had one turn to sell or
when the trading house is full.
When selling, use the following rules:
- The trading house has room for just four goods. When it is full, no other
players may sell goods in this trading phase.
- The trading house buys only different kinds of goods (exception: office).
As his last duty, the trader empties the trading house if it is full with four
goods, placing them in their separate supply piles. If there are fewer than
four goods in the trading house, they remain there. It will be more difficult to
sell goods in the next trader phase, because of the kinds of goods already there
and the fewer number of spaces available.
Notes:
- Remember the special functions of the small and large markets and the office.
- If the trader does not sell, he does not collect the extra doubloon (privilege).
- A player may sell corn to the trading house even though he earns no money for
doing so.
The building cost can be
reduced with occupied
quarries.
action:
all players take
goods from the
supply
privilege:
the craftsman takes
an additional good
Note: The craftsman is the riskiest
role in the game. Players must watch
carefully that they do not help their
opponents more than themselves by
taking this role!
action:
each player may, at
most, sell 1 good to
the trading house
privilege:
the trader earns 1
extra doubloon
when he sells
The trading house buys only
different goods (exception:
office!).
At the end of the phase, the
trader empties the trading
house if it is full.
THE CAPTAIN (captain phase k shipping of goods)
The captain is in charge of shipping goods to the old world. This means
that the captain is the first to load goods on the cargo ships. Then, the other
players follow, in clockwise order from the captain.
Note: in the captain phase, each player may get several turns to load goods on the cargo
ships. When it is a players turn to load goods on a cargo ship, he must load if he can.
However, a player may load goods of only one kind on a turn.
The captain phase continues, clockwise around the table, as long as at least
one player has goods he can load.
Loading/shipping rules
When shipping, players must follow these rules:
- Each cargo ship will carry goods of only one kind.
- Players may not load goods on a cargo ship if goods of that same kind
are on one of the other two cargo ships.
- Players may not load goods on a full ship.
- On a players turn, he must load goods if he can. However, he may only
load one kind of goods.
- When a player loads goods of a kind, he must load as many of that kind
as he can. A player cannot hold back goods when there is space on a
ship carrying the kind of goods he has. If a player has a kind of goods
that can be loaded on several empty ships, he must choose the ship
where he can load the most goods, leaving none behind, if possible.
- If a player has several kinds of goods that he can load, he may choose
freely, which goods to load. He need not choose the goods that would allow
him to load the most barrels.
Victory points
For each good (each barrel, not each kind of good) a player loads, he earns
one victory point (1 VP) in the form of value 1 victory point chips. When
loading goods onto the cargo ships, all kinds of goods have the same value: 1 VP
per barrel loaded! The goods values used in the trader phase are not used here.
When loading his first kind of goods, the captain takes as his privilege one
extra victory point. He does not get extra VPs for each kind he loads.
A player keeps his victory points, unlike his money and goods, secret from
the others. A player puts his victory point chips face-down on his windrose.
From time to time, players should convert 5 value 1 chips for a single value
5 chip.
Goods storage
When no more goods can be loaded on the cargo ships, the players must
store the goods left on their windroses. Each player may store one good (one
barrel) on his windrose. For all other remaining goods, each player must
find room in one of his warehouses (small or large). If a player does not
have sufficient warehouse space, he must place all extra goods back in the
goods supplies (see more information under small warehouse).
As his last duty, the captain unloads all full ships by placing those goods back
in their separate supply piles. Partially full and empty ships remain as they
are until the next captain phase. It will be more difficult to load goods in the
next captain phase, because of the kinds of goods already on the cargo ships
and the fewer number of spaces available.
Notes:
- Remember the special functions of the small and large warehouses, the harbor, and
the wharf.
action:
the players must
load goods on the
cargo ships
privilege:
the captain earns 1
extra victory point
Each cargo ship can carry only
goods of one kind, but not
goods like any other cargo
ship.
When no players can load any
more goods, the captain phase
ends and the captain empties
all full cargo ships.
Goods storage!
Each player may store only one
good (exception: warehouses!)
example for the captain phase
(with 4 players):
Anna is captain and starts the loading. She
has 2 corn and 6 sugar. The 5 space ship and
the 7 space ship are empty, and there are 3
corn on the 6 space ship. Anna must load
either her 2 corn or 6 sugar. She chooses the
sugar and loads her 6 sugar barrels on the 7
space ship (she may not choose the 5 space
ship as she could not load all 6 sugar). She
earns 7 VPs (6 + 1 for the captain privilege).
Bob is next. He has 2 sugar and 3 tobacco.
He chooses sugar and loads 1 barrel on the 7
space ship, filling it (he cannot load his
other sugar as there is no room). He could,
instead, choose to load his 3 tobacco on the
empty 5 space ship, but hopes to sell tobacco
to the trading house later. He earns 1 VP.
Chris is next. She has 2 corn and 1 tobacco.
She chooses tobacco and loads 1 tobacco on
the empty 5 space ship. She earns 1 VP.
David is next. He has 1 corn and 5 indigo.
He must load the corn on the 6 space ship as
he has no place for his indigo. He earns 1
VP.
Anna now has another turn. She must now
load her 2 corn on the 6 space ship. She
earns 2 more VP.
Bob has now no choice but to load his 3
tobacco on the 5 space ship. He earns 3 more
VP.
Chris and David have goods left, but no
place to load them. Anna and Bob have no
goods left. Thus, the loading ends.
Next, Chris, and David must store the goods
they have left. As they both have more than
1, they will have to place the extras in
storage or lose them. Finally, Anna unloads
the two full ships: the 6 space ship and the 7
space ship. The 4 tobacco remain on the 5
space ship.
action:
none!
privilege:
the prospector
takes 1 doubloon
from the bank
end of the round:
Place 1 doubloon on each of
the three unused role cards.
Return all used role cards.
Give the governor card to the
next player in clockwise order,
who starts the next round
GAME END:
The game ends, when
- there are not enough
colonists to fill the
colonist ship
- at least one player has built
on his 12 city spaces
- the victory point chips
are exhausted
Each player adds:
- his VP chips +
- the VP of his buildings +
- the extra VP of his large
buildings (when occupied!)
The player with the most
victory points is the winner.
- If a player cannot store all his extra goods, he may choose which goods to store and
which to return to the goods supply.
- The captain earns only one extra VP as his privilege, regardless of how many kinds
of goods he loads. If he loads no goods, he does not get the extra privilege VP.
- Players only check for goods storage at the end of the captain phase. Players store
goods acquired in other phases on the windroses without limit until the next captain
phase.
THE PROSPECTORS
The player who chooses this role initiates no action, but receives as his
privilege 1 doubloon from the bank.
A new round...
After the last player in the round takes a role and all players complete the
action, if any, of the role, the round ends. Now, the governor takes three
doubloons from the bank, placing one each on the three role cards that
were not selected during the round. The doubloons are placed regardless of
the number of doubloons already on the cards. Role cards with more
doubloons will be more attractive to the players as they get the doubloons
in addition to the privilege of the card. For example, a player choosing a
prospector card with 2 doubloons will get, in total, 3 doubloons for his effort.
Finally, the players return the role cards they selected to the area next to
the game board and the governor gives the governor card to his left
neighbor. The new governor begins the next round by selecting a role card,
and so the game continues.
GAME END
The game ends at the end of the round, in which at least one of the
following conditions is satisfied:
- at the end of the mayor phase there are not enough colonists to fill the
colonist ship as required;
- during the builder phase, at least one player builds on his 12th city
space;
- during the captain phase, the last of the victory point chips is used.
When the victory point chips are exhausted, players earning victory points
thereafter should track them with pencil and paper.
The victory points of the players are now scored with pencil and paper.
Each player adds:
- the value of his VP chips (including those noted on pencil and paper) +
- the VP value of his buildings (red-brown number in upper left) +
- the extra VPs of his occupied large buildings
Note: a building scores its victory points even when it is not occupied. Thus, for
example, the five large buildings score 4 VP each when they are not occupied.
The five large buildings score the extra victory points only when they are
occupied!
The player with the most victory points is the winner! If two or more
players tie with the most VPs, the player with the most doubloons and
goods together (1 good = 1 doubloon) is the winner.
THE BUILDINGS
A player may build only
one of each building.
Only occupied buildings
have any value.
The production buildings
For corn, there is no
production building!
The circles on the production
buildings indicate the
maximum number of goods the
building can produce.
THE BUILDINGS
For all buildings:
- Each player may build each building only once.
- When at least one colonist is in the building, it is considered occupied.
Only occupied buildings have any value (exception: victory points).
- Where a building is placed in the city has no bearing on the game. A
building is placed on an empty city space. A large building requires two
adjacent empty city spaces. A building may be moved within the city to
make room for a large building. However, as with the plantation and
quarry tiles on the island, a player may not remove a building from his
city (to, for example, make room for another building or prolong the game).
- The red-brown number in the upper right corner of each building
indicates how many victory points the building is worth (occupied or
unoccupied) at the end of the game.
- The number in the first circle is the cost to build the building. Once
built, the building cost has no further role in the game.
The production buildings (blue, white, light and dark brown)
The production buildings are required, together with the plantations, for
the production of certain goods:
- In the indigo processing plants, the indigo plants are processed to
produce indigo dye (blue goods barrels).
- In the sugar mills, the sugar canes are processed into sugar (white goods
barrels).
- In the tobacco storage, the tobacco leaves are shredded into tobacco
(light brown barrels).
- In the coffee roasters, the coffee beans are roasted into coffee (dark
brown barrels).
- Note: there is no production facility needed for the corn. Corn (yellow barrels) come
directly from the plantation without any need for processing. That means that, in
the craftsman phase, occupied corn plantations produce corn (yellow barrels)
directly.
The number of circles on the production buildings indicates the maximum
number of goods the building can produce when the circles have colonists
on them. Of course, the player must also have sufficient occupied
plantations of the appropriate kind to produce the raw materials needed to
produce the goods in the production buildings.
example
The player produces
the following goods:
2 corn barrels
(as the 3rd corn plantation
is not occupied)
1 tobacco barrel
(as the 2nd circle in the tobacco
storage has no colonist)
3 sugar barrels
(as the 4th sugar plantation
is not occupied)
The violet buildings
- the special functions may be
used to break the rules
- they need not be used
Notes:
- The raw materials used in production do not exist in this game. In the example on
page 8, the players get only the end products of their production. The unused
colonists (such as the colonist on the second tobacco plantation and the fourth
colonist in the sugar mills) produce nothing!
- As described under the craftsman, when a player produces a good and the supply
for that good is empty, the player gets nothing.
The violet buildings
There are 17 different violet buildings: two each of the 12 small buildings
and one each of the 5 large buildings.
The special functions of the violet buildings tend to allow players to
break the normal game rules. So, for example, the owner of an occupied
office may sell a kind of goods to the trading house that is already there.
A player is not required to use the special function of an occupied violet
building if he does not want to (important with the wharf, see below).
Small market
When the owner of an occupied small market sells a good in the trader
phase, he gets an extra doubloon from the bank for it.
Example: Anna sells a corn and receives 1 doubloon.
Hacienda
On his turn in the settler phase, the owner of an occupied hacienda may,
before he takes a face-up plantation tile, take an additional tile from the
face-down stack (the top-most) and place it on an empty space on his
island. He may then take his normal turn in the phase.
Note:if a player chooses to take a face-down tile, he must immediately place it on
an empty space on his island. He may not discard it. If the player also owns an
occupied construction hut, he may not take a quarry instead of the face-down tile.
Thus, if the settler owns a hacienda, he may only take one quarry.
Construction hut
In the settler phase, the owner of an occupied construction hut, can
place a quarry on his island instead of one of the face-up plantation tiles.
Note: if the settler owns a construction hut, he may only take one quarry.
Small warehouse
As described under the captain, players must store their unloaded goods
at the end of the captain phase. If a player does not have sufficient
storage space, he must return the goods to the goods supplies.
The owner of an occupied small warehouse may store, at the end of the
captain phase, in addition to the single goods barrel he is allowed to store
on his windrose, all the barrels of one kind of goods that he chooses. The
warehouse protects the player from returning goods to the supply. It does
not protect the player from being required to load the goods onto the
cargo ships.
Note: the goods chosen are not actually stored on the small warehouse tile, but on
the players windrose.
Hospice
During the settler phase, when the owner of an occupied hospice places
a plantation or quarry tile on his island, he may take a colonist from the
colonist supply and place it on this tile.
Note: if the player also owns an occupied hacienda and chooses to take the
additional face-down or quarry tile, he does not get a colonist for the extra tile.
If there are no more colonists in the colonist supply, he may take one from the
colonist ship. If there are also none there, he goes without.
Office
When the owner of an occupied office sells a good to the trading house in
the trader phase, it need not be different than the goods already there. If
the trading house is full, the player cannot sell a good there!
Example: the trading house already has a barrel of tobacco. Bob owns an occupied
office and, on his turn, sells a tobacco to the trading house. Chris owns the other
office. On her turn it is occupied, so she too can sell a tobacco to the trading house.
Large market
When the owner of an occupied large market sells a good in the trader
phase, he gets an extra 2 doubloons from the bank for it.
Note: if a player owns both a small and large market, he takes an extra 3 doubloons
when he sells a good to the trading house.
Large warehouse
The owner of an occupied large warehouse may store, at the end of the
captain phase, in addition to the single goods barrel he is allowed to store
on his windrose, all the barrels of two kinds of goods that he chooses.
Note: if a player owns both a small and large warehouse, he may store all the barrels
of 3 kinds of goods that he chooses.
Factory
If the owner of an occupied factory produces goods of more than one kind
in the craftsman phase, he earns money from the bank: for two kinds of
goods, he earns 1 doubloon, for three kinds of goods, he earns 2 doubloons,
for four kinds of goods, he earns 3 doubloons, and for all five kinds of goods,
he earns 5 doubloons. The number of barrels produced plays no role.
Example: David owns an occupied factory, 3 occupied corn plantations, 3 occupied
sugar plantations, 1 occupied tobacco plantation, and the associated production
buildings with the necessary number of colonists. He produces only 2 sugar barrels
and 1 tobacco barrel as there is no corn and only 2 sugar barrels in the supply. He
earns 1 doubloon from the bank for producing 2 kinds of goods.
University
During the builder phase, when the owner of an occupied university builds
a building in his city, he may take a colonist from the colonist supply and
place it on this tile.
Note: if he builds a production building with more than one circle, he gets only one
colonist. If there are no more colonists in the colonist supply, he may take one from
the colonist ship. If there are also none there, he goes without.
Harbor
Each time, during the captain phase, the owner of an occupied harbor loads
goods on a cargo ship, he earns one extra victory point.
Example: the owner of an occupied harbor (and an occupied wharf) can only load 3
of his 5 tobacco on the tobacco ship as those 3 fill it up: he earns 3+1 VP. In his
next loading turn, he loads both his 2 sugar on the sugar ship: he earns 2+1 VP. In
his next loading turn, he uses his wharf to put his remaining 2 tobacco in the supply:
he earns 2+1 VP. Thus, in this captain phase he has earned an additional 3 VP with
the use of his harbor (and 2 VP extra with his wharf).
Wharf
During the captain phase, when a player with an occupied wharf must load
goods, instead of loading them on a cargo ship, he may place all goods of
one kind in the goods supply and score the appropriate victory points as
though he had loaded them on a cargo ship. It is as though the player has
an imaginary ship with unlimited capacity at his disposal.
Example: in the example with the harbor
above, lets assume the player used his wharf
ship to place all 5 tobacco barrels in the
supply. In this case, the tobacco ship would
likely not be full at the end of the captain
phase, and, therefore, not emptied as it was
in the above example.
The player must load goods on a cargo ship whenever he can on his turn
during the captain phase, except when he chooses to use his wharf and
load them on his imaginary ship.
The wharf can only be used once per captain phase by its owner, but he
may choose when to use it, if at all. This imaginary ship can take any one
good, but it may be of a kind on one of the three cargo ships or the other
imaginary wharf ship.
Note: when a player uses his wharf, he must load all the goods barrels of the kind
he chooses that he has. He is not required, however, to choose the good he has the
most of.
An imaginary wharf ship has the capacity for 11 barrels.
The large buildings
The following five large buildings occur just once each in the game. Each
needs two adjacent city spaces to be built, but it counts as one building.
Note: when, in these rules, large building is mentioned, it is the following five
buildings that are described!
Guild hall
The owner of the occupied guild hall earns, at game end, an additional 1 VP
for each small production building (occupied or unoccupied) in his city (=
small indigo plant and small sugar mill), and an additional 2 VP for each
large production building (occupied or unoccupied) in his city (= indigo
plant, sugar mill, tobacco storage, and coffee roaster).
Example: at game end, the owner of the occupied guild hall also has a small and
large sugar mill, a small indigo plant, and a coffee roaster in his city: he earns an
additional 6 VP.
Residence
The owner of the occupied residence earns, at game end, additional victory
points for the plantations and quarries he has placed on his island. For up
to nine filled island spaces, he earns 4 VP, for ten filled island spaces, he
earns 5 VP, for eleven filled island spaces, he earns 6 VP, and for all twelve
spaces filled, he earns 7 VP.
Example: at game end, the owner of the occupied residence has filled 10 of his 12
island spaces with plantations and quarries: he earns an additional 5 VP.
Fortress
The owner of the occupied fortress earns, at game end, one additional
victory point for every three colonists on his player board.
Example: at game end, the owner of the occupied fortress has a total of 20 colonists
on his plantations, quarries, buildings, and in San Juan: he earns an additional 6 VP.
Customs house
The owner of the occupied customs house earns, at game end, one
additional victory point for every four victory points he acquired during
the game. The player should count only his victory point chips (and any
extra victory points recorded on paper after the chip supply was exhausted,
but before game end). He does not use victory points earned for his
buildings at game end.
Example: at game end, the owner of the occupied customs house has accumulated 23
victory points in VP chips: he earns an additional 5 VP.
City Hall
The owner of the occupied city hall earns, at game end, one additional
victory point for each violet building (occupied or unoccupied) in his city
(city hall counts!).
Example: at game end, the owner of the occupied city hall also has: hacienda, harbor,
office, construction hut, large warehouse, and residence: he earns an additional 7 VP.
If you have comments, questions, or suggestions, please write us at:
Rio Grande Games, PO Box 45715, Rio Rancho, NM 87174, USA
E-Mail: RioGames@aol.com
2001 Andreas Seyfarth
2002 Ravensburger Spieleverlag
The author and publisher wish to thank the many playtesters for
their help and suggestion, especially:
Beate Bachl, Sibylle Bergmann, Christine & Peter Drdoth, Walburga
Freudenstein, Holger Frieberg, Markus Huber, Andreas Maszuhn,
Michael Meier-Bachl, Karen Seyfarth, Dominik Wagner, the Wiener
Spiele Akademie, and the gaming groups from Berlin, Bdefeld,
Gttingen and Rosenheim.
please visit our website:
www.riograndegames.com
We recommend that players keep this page available during the game so they have easy access to the information
on the buildings. This is especially useful to those players who are seated so that the game board is up-side-down
from them.



GAME NAME:
Terraforming Mars

Humanity has begun to spread throughout the
solar system. On Mars, a few small colonies have been
built. These offer protection from the environment, from
a planet which is terribly cold, dry, and with almost no
atmosphere.
To be able to increase immigration from Earth,
Mars needs to be terraformed by altering its environment
until humans can live there without expensive protective
gear, and without even minor accidents becoming
lethal. Therefore the World Government has decided
to support any organization that contributes to this vast
undertaking.
The generous funding attracts gigantic
corporations that compete to expand their businesses
and emerge as the most influential force behind the
terraforming. In this era, great opportunities lie in the
taming of the Red Planet.

THE TERRAFORMING ANNOUNCEMENT:
Since its inception in 2174, the World Government has continually strived for
global unity and peace. Our mission is to be humanitys shared tool for shaping a
better future.
Earth is overpopulated and resources are dwindling. We now face the choice either
to recede, or to expand into space to find new homes for humanity. For this reason,
we need to turn Mars into a habitable planet.
The terraforming of Mars is an endeavor so great that it will take the united effort
of mankind to accomplish. The World Government will therefore inaugurate
a Terraforming Committee, and instate a universal tax for this purpose. Any
corporation or enterprise contributing to the terraforming process will be
generously rewarded by the Committee. We believe that these measures will,
eventually, result in a habitable planet for our descendants.
Thank you for your attention!
Levi Uken, World Government communicator, January 16, 2315 AD.

BACKGROUND CONTENTS:
Background 2
Game Overview 3
Global Parameters 3
Game Board 4
Tiles & Markers 5
Player Boards 6
Cards 6
Setup 7
Generations 8
Actions 9
Game End 12
Game Variants 13
Symbols 14
Credits 16

GAME OVERVIEW:
A Terraformed Mars
Each area or tile on the game board represents 1% of the
Martian surface, so 9 Ocean tiles represents 9% ocean coverage,
which should be enough to enable stable hydrological cycles, air
moisture, and weather patterns. Water is also important, as it
moderates temperature swings. At very low temperatures, oceans
are actually glaciers for most of the year.
Although the temperature on Mars can already reach
20 C on hot summer days, this is not enough. To enable liquid
oceans, the mean temperature has to be positive, at least at the
equator.
The most important parameter for terraforming is
the oxygen level. Without a breathable atmosphere, Mars is not
liveable, not terraformed. Earths oxygen content is 21% of the
atmosphere, 0.21 atm. At higher altitudes, this decreases as the
atmosphere becomes thinner. At 3000 m the oxygen level is 0.14
atm and there are a few major cities at this altitude, mostly in the
Andes and in China. The most notable examples are the Bolivian
cities El Alto (4150 m) and La Paz (3640 m), each with nearly a
million inhabitants.
Earths atmosphere also contains 78% nitrogen, the
main component responsible for air pressure. Air pressure is
also important, if not as crucial as oxygen level. Another aspect
of terraforming is Mars very weak magnetic field. These aspects
are not represented by a global parameter, but usually result in a
higher TR for the player, as indicated on the specific cards.
Temperature, oxygen, and ocean are called global
parameters. Whenever you raise one of them, your
terraform rating also increases by that much, giving you a
higher income and score.
When a global parameter has reached its goal, it
cant be raised any further, and so does not increase your
TR. You may still play cards and actions that increase the
parameter - just ignore that part of the effect.
When all three global parameters have reached
their goal, the game ends after that generation (after the
production phase).

GLOBAL PARAMETERS:
In Terraforming Mars, you control a corporation,
and you buy and play cards describing different projects.
The projects often directly or indirectly contribute to the
terraforming process, but can also consist of business
enterprises of different kinds. In order to win, you have to
accumulate a good terraform rating (TR) and many victory
points (VPs). Your TR is increased each time you raise a
global parameter (temperature, oxygen or ocean). Your TR
determines your basic income, as well as your basic score. As
the terraforming process proceeds, more projects become
feasible. Additional VPs are awarded for anything enhancing
mankinds grip on the solar system. This can be anything,
from founding cities to building infrastructure, or protecting
the environment.
Time is measured in generations, and each
generation starts with a Turn Order phase, followed by a
Research phase, in which players access new cards. In the
Action phase, players take turns doing 1 or 2 actions, going
around the table until everyone has passed. Then, in the
Production phase, all players produce resources according to
their production parameters on the player boards, and gain
income from their TR.
The central game board has tracks for temperature,
oxygen level, terraform rating, and generations. There is
a surface map where you add ocean tiles, greenery tiles,
and city tiles as the game progresses. There is also a list of
standard projects available to all players, as well as milestones
and awards that players can compete for.
The game ends when there is enough oxygen to
breathe (14 %), oceans enough to allow Earth-like weather
(9), and the temperature is well above freezing (+8 C). It will
then be possible, if not comfortable, to live on the surface of
Mars!
The winner is the player with most VPs
at the end of the game. VPs come from your
TR, your tiles on the game board, won awards,
claimed milestones, and VPs on cards you have
played.

GAME BOARD:
1. Terraform rating (TR) track: All players start at 20. This
is your basic income (see pages 6 and 8) and VPs. You increase it every time you terraform.
2. Generation track: The generation marker measures time
(rounds) and starts at 1, moving up on the TR track.
3. Solo games start with a TR of 14, and end after generation
14.
4. Oxygen: This global parameter starts at 0%. This percentage compares to Earths 21% oxygen.
5. Ocean tiles: This global parameter starts with 9 tiles in a
stack here, to be placed on the board during the game.
6. Temperature: This global parameter (mean temperature
at the equator) starts at -30 C.
7. Bonus steps: If you raise the parameter to this point, you
also get the attached bonus. The Map
The game board has an accurate map of the Tharsis
region of Mars, including Valles Marineris and 3 of the 4 great
volcanos. Only the region around Olympus Mons is missing.
The areas reserved for Ocean tiles are low in elevation so water
will naturally flow there. The plant bonuses around the equator
simulate that the higher average temperature will make it easier
for life to thrive there. Mountain ridges have steel and titanium
bonuses, while other interesting sites may have a card draw
bonus, like the Viking site where the first man-made lander
touched down.
The Bonus Steps
As the atmosphere thickens, greenhouse effects
will raise the temperature, as indicated by the bonus at 8%
oxygen.
As the temperature rises, carbon dioxide will thaw
out, adding a greenhouse warming effect as indicated by the
heat production bonuses. Then, at 0 C, ice-bound water in
the soil will begin to melt, adding water to the surface.
8. Standard Projects: May be used by any player regardless
of what cards you have. See page 10.
9. Milestones / Awards: Can be a good source of extra VPs.
See pages 10 and 11.
10. Placement bonuses: When placing a tile on an area with
a placement bonus, you get the printed resources or cards.
See page 5.
11. Ocean-reserved areas: Blue areas are reserved for ocean
tiles; ocean tiles may only be placed here and no other tile
may be placed here.
12. Special reserved areas: 3 areas are reserved for specific
cities. No other tiles may be placed there.
Dont forget! Increasing
a global parameter also
increases your TR!

MARKERS:

TILES:
The game board has a map where tiles may be
placed. When placing a tile, you must first check to see if
there are any placement restrictions. There are areas reserved
for ocean and specific cities, where no other tiles may be
placed. Furthermore, each tile may have specific restrictions
printed on the respective card or in the summaries below.
When you place the tile, you receive the placement
bonus printed on that area (if any). You also get a bonus for
placing tiles next to ocean tiles (see below).
Ocean tile: Ocean tiles may only be placed on
areas reserved for ocean (see map). Placing an
ocean tile increases your TR 1 step. Ocean tiles are
not owned by any player. Each ocean tile on the
board provides a 2 M placement bonus for any
player later placing a tile, even another ocean, next to it.
Example: If you place a city tile adjacent to 2 different
ocean tiles you get 4 M as placement bonus
Greenery tile: If possible, greenery tiles must
be placed next to another tile that you own. If
you have no available area next to your tiles, or if
you have no tile at all, you may place the greenery
tile on any available area. Place a player marker on it to
mark your ownership. When placing a greenery tile, you
increase the oxygen level, if possible, and also your TR. If
you cant raise the oxygen level you dont get the increase
in TR either. Greenery tiles are worth 1 VP at the end of the
game, and also provide 1 VP to any adjacent city (see below).
City tile: May not be placed next to another
city (exception: Noctis city must always be
placed on its reserved area). Add a player marker.
Each city tile is worth 1 VP for each adjacent
greenery tile (regardless of owner) at the end of
the game. (Note: the card Capital places the unique Capital
city tile, which counts and scores like a normal city tile, but
additionally gives you VPs for adjacent ocean tiles, as stated
on the card.)
Special tiles: Some cards allow you to place
special tiles. Any function or placement
restriction is described on the card. Place the
tile, and place a player marker on it.
Resource cubes: Resources are collected on the player board
or on specific cards. There are many types of resources (see
page 14), but they are all marked by these cubes:
BRONZE = 1
SILVER = 5
GOLD = 10
Player markers: Each player uses his own color
to mark TR, ownership of tiles, production
(see page 6), and to indicate used blue card
actions (see page 11).
Temperature, oxygen, and generation
markers: Start at the beginning of the
respective track (see page 4).
First player marker: Shifts clockwise each
generation.
One small step for man, but make sure you
watch that step!

PLAYER BOARDS:

CARDS:
The player board keeps track of your current resources
and production. Resource cubes are placed in their respective
boxes, and player markers are used on the production tracks.
In the game, resource icons refer to resource cubes, while
resource icons inside brown boxes refer to production of
that resource (see the project card below).
1. Production tracks: If you gain production of a resource,
mark the new production level with your player marker.
Production is not limited to 10. Example: If you play a card
that increases your heat production 3 steps from 19 to 22 you
mark this by having 2 player markers on 10 and 1 marker on 2
on the production track above the heat box. Impressive!
During the production phase you add resource cubes equal to
your production.
2. MegaCredits (M) : Are used to pay for cards and other
things. Note: Your M income is the sum of your M production and your TR. M production is the only production that
can be negative, but it may never be lowered below -5.
3. Steel: Is only used to pay for cards with a building tag and
is worth 2 M/cube. You may pay with both M and steel, but
you get no refund for overpaying with steel.
4. Titanium: Is only used to pay for cards with a space tag and
is worth 3 M/cube, similar to steel.
5. Plants: May be converted into greenery tiles by using the
depicted action (see pages 5 and 11).
6. Energy: Is used by many cards. All leftover energy is converted into heat at the beginning of the production phase.
7. Heat: May be spent to raise temperature 1 step by using the
depicted action (see page 11).
Each player starts the game with a corporation card. During the game,
players buy and play many project cards to get benefits of different kinds. The cards
are divided into active cards (blue frame, see example), automated cards (green) and
event cards (red), read more on page 10.
1. Tag: Places the card in certain categories, which can affect or be affected by other
cards, or by the player board (e.g. you can pay with steel when playing a building tag).
2. Starting conditions: This tells you how much money (M) you start with, as well
as other starting resources and production. Some corporations also have a fixed first
action described here (see example card).
3. Effect / action: Boxes marked by a blue ribbon show an ongoing effect or action
that may be used during the game. Actions may be used only once per generation,
while effects are always active.
4. Flavor text: Gives you some background information and feeling for the card.
5. Cost: This is what you pay to play the card from your hand. (To get cards into your
hand, you must first buy them during the research phase, see page 8).
6. Requirement: Any requirement must be met in order to play the card. Some cards
require a global parameter to have reached a certain level, while others can only be
played while the parameter is still low (see example card). Some cards require that
you have certain tags or production. (Note: In order to play the card you must also be
able to perform the effects of the card, see page 9.) Note also that the requirement only
needs to be fulfilled when playing the card, not when you use it later.
7. Immediate effects: Most cards affect your (or your opponents) resources or
production. You may also get tiles to place, or other effects.
8. VPs: Some cards give you victory points at the end of the game.
If you are uncertain of how a card works, read the text in parenthesis.

SETUP:
This describes the setup for the standard
game for 2-5 players. See additional rules for other
game variants on page 13.
1) Game board: Place the game board centrally
on the table. Place the 9 ocean tiles on their reserved
space. Place the temperature and oxygen markers on
their starting positions. Also place the generation
marker on 1 on the TR track.
2) Resource cubes and remaining tiles are placed
so that everyone can reach them.
3) Project deck: Make sure you have no
Corporate Era cards in the project deck or among
the corporation cards. These are marked with a red
and white icon in the lower left edge ( ). Shuffle the
project cards and place the project deck next to the
board. Leave space for a discard pile beside it.
4) Players: The player who most recently won a
game of Terraforming Mars is given the first player
marker. Players choose their colors and take the
corresponding player markers and a player board.
You start with 1 production of each resource on the
player board, so place player markers on the tracks
(only in standard game.) Each player also places one
marker at the starting position (20) of the TR track.
5) Corporation cards: Players new to
Terraforming Mars each get a Beginner Corporation
card (colorless card back) and follow its instruction
to get 42 MegaCredits and draw 10 project cards to
form their starting hand. Then they can examine their
cards while experienced players continue this setup
without them. Shuffle the 10 standard corporation
cards (excluding the 2 Corporate Era corporations)
and deal 2 to each remaining player.
6) Project cards: Deal 10 cards to each remaining
player. These are cards that players may buy for their
starting hands (3 M each). Now the players examine
their options for their starting hand and corporation.
7) Starting conditions: Players choose which of
the corporations they want to play, and which of the
10 project cards they want to keep for their starting
hand. The cards not kept are discarded (put discarded
corporations back in the box) - cards are always
discarded face down! In player order, players then
reveal their chosen corporation, get their starting
resources and production (if any), and then pay 3 M
for each project card they keep. Be aware that your
resources for the following few generations will be
quite limited until you get your economy going.
8) Start the game: The first generation starts
without a player order phase and without a research
phase (since you just performed those phases during
setup), so the first player just starts the action phase.
Example: Kim, Stanley, and Robinson decide to play
a standard game of Terraforming Mars. They each
choose their color, take a player board and mark
starting production by placing markers on 1 on the six
production tracks. Kim, the first player, deals 10 project
cards and 2 corporation cards to each player. They
examine their cards, and when they have all decided
which cards and corporations they want, they start to
reveal them in player order.
Kim reveals her corporation: PhoboLog, which gives
her 10 titanium resources and 23 M that she collects
on her player board. Then she declares that she buys
5 cards to her hand, paying 15 M for them. Shes got
a few expensive space cards that will put her titanium
to good use. Then she discards the unused corporation
card back into the box, and the 5 unbought project
cards face down into the discard pile next to the deck.
Stanley then reveals that hes going to play ThorGate,
starting with 48 M and 1 energy production, which he
marks on his player board. Stanley decides to keep all
10 cards and pays 30 M for them.
Robinson decides to play Tharsis Republic (see example
card on previous page). He adds 40 M to his player
board and pays 12 M for the 4 cards he decides to
keep, leaving 28 M. As his first action, he will get to
place a city tile. Not only that, but the city tile may give
him a placement bonus as well, and his corporation
card says that he may increase his M production 1
step each time a city tile is placed on Mars, and that
he also gets 3 M back when he places any city himself.
And now the first generation starts with Kim taking the
first turn in the Action phase...

GENERATIONS:
Because of the long time spans needed for the
projects, this game is played in a series of generations. Each
generation the players go through 4 phases.
1) Player Order phase
The first player marker shifts 1 step clockwise and
the generation marker is moved up 1 step. This phase is
skipped the first generation (see setup).
2) Research phase
Each player draws 4 cards and decides which of
them he wants to buy to his hand. Each card costs 3 M to
buy to the hand, and you may buy 0-4 cards. The rest of the
4 drawn cards are discarded face down on the discard pile.
There is no hand limit.
This phase is also skipped the first generation (see
setup).
Example: In the second generation, the players have
their first normal research phase. They put down their hand
cards and draw 4 cards each to buy from. Stanley decides to
buy 3 of his cards, so he pays 9 M and discards the remaining
card, adding the 3 new cards to his hand.
3) Action phase (see page 9)
Players take 1 or 2 actions each turn, or pass. Play
proceeds clockwise around the table until all players have
passed. The actions may be combined in any way the player
chooses. The available actions are:
A) Play a card from your hand (see page 9).
B) Use a standard project (see page 10).
C) Claim a milestone (see page 10).
D) Fund an award (page 11).
E) Use the action on a blue card (see page 11).
F) Convert 8 plants into a greenery tile (which gives an oxygen increase) as described on the player board (see page 11).
G) Convert 8 heat into a temperature increase as described
on the player board (see page 11).
You can choose to take 1 or 2 actions on your
turn. If you take no action at all (pass), you are out of
the round and may not take any anymore actions this
generation. When everyone has passed, the action phase
ends.
Example: Stanley starts the second generation action
phase by using the standard project Sell patents (see page 10):
he discards a card to gain 1 M - he realized that that card
was not really helpful for his situation. Plus, he wants to see
what the others do before deciding his own course of action.
After that, Robinson uses the standard project City and pays
25 M to place a city and increase his M production 1 step.
Being Tharsis Republic, this gives him another M production and 3 M back, besides the normal tile placement bonus.
Content with just one action, he tells Kim to start her turn.
Kim plays the space project Asteroid Mining at a cost of 30
M, spending 8 titanium (its a space project). Because of
PhoboLogs effect, each titanium is worth 4 M, which makes
a total of 32 M. She could have
payed 7 titanium plus 2 M, but she
pays 8 anyway because shes low
on cash. Asteroid Mining allows
Kim to increase her titanium
production 2 steps, so she adjusts
that parameter on her player
board, and then places the
card before her. Kim decides
to play another space card as
her second action, spending
more titanium in the process,
before giving the turn to Stanley,
who now has decided to go for Geothermal Power.
That card has a power tag and costs 11 M, but because
Stanley has the corporation ThorGate, with a discount effect
for power cards, he only needs to pay 8 M for it.
And so the turn continues around until everyone is out by
doing no actions.
4) Production phase
All players perform this phase simultaneously.
First, all energy is converted into heat (move all resource
cubes from the energy box to the heat box). Secondly, all
players receive new resources:
Players get M according to their terraform rating
plus any M production (which may be negative!), then the
players also get any other resources they have production of
according to the player board. Place all generated resources
in their corresponding boxes. (See page 6)
Finally, remove player markers from used action
cards, to mark that they may be used again next generation
(see page 11).
Now you are ready to start the next generation.
Example: Kim gains 21 M from her TR and M
production. She also produces 3 titanium resources (because
she played Asteroid Mining earlier), and 1 each of the other
resources, adding them on her player board.

ACTIONS:
As shown on page 8, there are 7 different actions that
players may choose from on their turn. Players may do 1 or
2 actions on their turn, in any combination (for example 2 of
the same action). By choosing 2 actions, a player can surprise
the others, by doing more than they expected and beat them
to some goal or bonus. Choosing only 1 action can be useful
too - it can be used for waiting out your opponents or just to
do a no-brainer while thinking about your more important
decisions.
A) Play a card from your hand
When playing a card, there are 3 steps to consider:
1) Check the requirements.
2) Pay for the card and get any immediate effects.
3) Place the card appropriately.
1) Check the requirements.
In order to play a card you must meet its requirements and be able to perform the effects stated on the card,
with the following exceptions: You may play a card that...
- raises global parameters that have already reached
their goal (for example when there are no more ocean tiles, or
when the temperature is at +8 C).
- adds resources that you cant collect (for example
adding microbe resources without having any microbe
project to place them on).
-removes resources for any player (red-bordered
resource icons, see example on card C below) if you cant or
do not wish to.
Even if these effects cant be performed, you may still play the
card, performing all other effects as usual.
Example: Kim can play Asteroid (card C) even if the
temperature has reached its goal, but then she gets no TR. She
may also choose not to remove any plants at all, or just do it
partly (maybe only Kim herself has plants, or maybe Stanley or Robinson have less than 3 plants to remove). All plants
must be taken from the same player, though.
Cards A, B, D and E below each have a requirement
listed next to the cards cost. To play card A, you need to
have titanium production. To play card B, the oxygen level
needs to be 9% or lower, and you also need to have energy
production since the card requires you to decrease your
energy production. To play card D, the oxygen level must be
9% or higher. You also need to have plant production, since
the card requires you to decrease your plant production.
Card E requires 5% oxygen and energy production.
The cost required to play the card is stated in the
upper left corner. Some blue cards already in play may
give you a discount (for example, E gives a discount when
playing a space card). You may also use steel and titanium to
help pay for building and space cards respectively.
2) Paying and performing immediate effects.
First you must pay the cards cost.
Then the lower panel of the card shows you any
immediate effects. These effects (and other effects triggered
by the card you just played) are performed in any order you
choose.
Any production (see brown boxes on cards A,
B, D & E) must be performed. Resources or production
with a red frame means that you can affect any player you
choose (even yourself). Resources or production without
red frames always affect yourself and must be performed.
So card A essentially steals a titanium production from an
opponent, while in B, D and E you must decrease your own
energy or plant production in order to increase your M
production.
Cards may also feature tiles and tags with a red
border. A red tile means any players tile, and a red tag
means any players tag.
B) Use a standard project
The 6 standard projects printed on the game board
are always available to the players. Each of them may be
used several times during the same generation.
1) Sell patents: You may discard a number of cards from
hand to gain the same number of M.
2) Power plant: For 11 M you get to increase your energy
production 1 step.
3) Asteroid: For 14 M you get to increase temperature 1
step (and your TR).
4) Aquifer: For 18 M you get to place an ocean tile (you
also get 1 TR and collect any placement bonus for the tile,
see page 5).
5) Greenery: For 23 M you get to place a greenery tile,
which increases oxygen level (and your TR) 1 step, and
collect any placement bonus for the tile. Put a player marker
on the tile. (See page 5)
6) City: For 25 M you get to place a city tile (collect any
placement bonus for the tile, and place a player marker on
it). You also get to increase your M production 1 step. (See
page 5)
Example: Robinsons first action on his turn is to use
the standard project City to gain his 3rd city tile, continuing
to get extra bonuses from his corporation Tharsis Republic.
C) Claim a milestone
If you meet the criteria of a milestone, you may
claim it by paying 8 M and placing your player marker on
it. A milestone may only be claimed by one player, and only
3 of the 5 milestones may be claimed in total, so there is a
race for these! Each claimed milestone is worth 5 VPs at the
end of the game.
These are the milestones and what you need to
claim them (besides paying 8 M):
1) Terraformer: Having a terraform rating of at least 35.
Any resources (C) are gained immediatley. Again,
a red border means you can choose the resources of any
one player, so playing card C is usually not very nice. Redbordered resources are optional, so card C does not remove
your own plants, even if you are the only player that has
any plant resources. Non-standard resources (that are not
collected on your player board) are instead collected on
specific cards (D). By default, those resources are usually
placed on the same card that generates them. Livestock (Card
D), for example, gains 1 animal (resource cube) on it when
you use its action (actions can be used once per generation).
Any tiles (B) placed by the card follow the rules for
tiles (see page 5). A tile must be placed if possible, but being
unable to do so does not prevent you from playing the card.
If a card has a (*), then it is an exception to the
normal rules, and you must read the explanation in
parenthesis to see details of how the card works.
If you ever become uncertain of a cards function,
read the explanation text.
VP icons (see cards A, D, E) are ignored for now,
they will be counted in the final scoring (see page 12). Card
D may be worth several VPs if its action (top panel) has had
time to work a few times to add more animal resources to the
card.
3) Place the card (see illustration below).
Events (red cards, C) are collected in a personal pile
face down after being played. Their tags only apply while
being played (for example using the discount on card E when
playing a space event).
Automated cards (green, A, B) are placed face up in
a stack on the table with only the top row visible. They have
no further effect, but since they represent the current extent
of your operations, their tags still apply.
Active cards (blue, D, E) have ongoing effects that
may trigger at any time, or actions that you can use (just
like the corporations). Since you need to keep track of these
cards, they are placed with the top panel visible.
Many cards represent ideas for terraforming. They may affect the global parameters or give
you a higher TR in other ways. They may represent
photosynthesising organisms releasing oxygen, or heat
sources that gradually raise the temperature.
There are also other cards that are interlinked
with the terraforming process, either requiring some
terraforming to have been done, or specializing in early
conditions.
Each card has a flavor text that may help you
get a feeling for what the card does in reality.
EVENT PILE
2) Mayor: Owning at least 3 city tiles.
3) Gardener: Owning at least 3 greenery tiles.
4) Builder: Having at least 8 building tags in play.
5) Planner: Having at least 16 cards in your hand when you
claim this milestone.
Example: Robinsons second action (after building
his 3rd city), is to claim the mayor, which he now qualifies
for. He pays 8 M and places one of his markers on the Mayor
milestone. This is worth 5 VPs! Only 2 more milestones may
be claimed now, and no one else may claim Mayor.
D) Fund an award
There is no requirement that must be met to fund
an award. The first player to fund an award pays 8 M and
places a player marker on it. The next player to fund an
award pays 14 M, the last pays 20 M. Only three awards
may be funded. Each award can only be funded once.
In the final scoring, each award is checked, and 5
VPs are awarded to the player who wins that category - it
does not matter who funded the award! The second place
gets 2 VPs (except in a 2-player game where second place
does not give any VPs). Ties are friendly: more than one
player may get the first or second place bonus (see example).
If more than one player gets 1st place bonus, no 2nd place is
awarded.
These are the awards and what they are awarded for:
1) Landlord: Owning the most tiles in play.
2) Banker: Having the highest M production.
3) Scientist: Having the most science tags in play.
4) Thermalist: Having the most heat resource cubes.
5) Miner: Having the most steel and titanium resource
cubes.
Example: Stanley pays 8 M to fund the award for
thermalist, since he thinks his GHG Factories will give him all
the heat he needs to win that award.
When the game ends, though, Kim also produces
heat and has 12 in her resource box, compared to Stanleys
12 and Robinsons 5. Stanley and Kim both get 5 VPs for first
place, while Robinson gets nothing.
E) Use the action on a blue card
Many blue cards and corporations have actions,
as indicated by a red arrow. Each such action card may be
used once each generation. When you use an action on a
blue card, you must first pay any cost stated to the left of
the arrow. You get whatever the arrow points to, and place a
player marker on the card to indicate that it has been used
this generation. The player markers will be removed during
the production phase.
Example: Towards the end of the game, Stanley has
Livestock (card D) in play. He can choose its action on his
turn, adding a resource cube (an animal) to that card, and
placing a player marker on it.
Blue cards may also have effects that are always active, like Shuttles (Card E): When you play a space card, it
costs 2 M less. These effects are not actions (no red arrow),
so you can always use them.
F) Convert plants into greenery
8 plant resources may be turned into a greenery
tile, which increases oxygen level 1 step (and therefore also
your TR 1 step).
Note that the greenery tile must be placed next to
another of your tiles (if possible) and may generate placement bonuses (see page 5).
Example: Robinson removes 8 plant resources from
his plant box on the player board, increasing oxygen level 1
step, and raising his terraform rating 1 step as well. Then he
takes a greenery tile and places it between 2 of his city tiles,
and takes the placement bonus, which happens to be 2 plants,
as printed on the chosen area.
Not only did this yield 1 TR plus placement bonus,
but the greenery will be worth 1 VP in itself as well as 1 VP to
each adjacent city in the end game scoring.
G) Convert heat into temperature
8 heat resources may be spent to increase
temperature 1 step (and therefore also your TR 1 step).
All we need is more power
Bjorn Sigmund, ThorGate CEO
GAME END
Suggestions
If you dont understand the symbols - read the explanation
in parenthesis on the card, or see page 14 & 15 in this
rulebook.
Sometimes there are many effects to keep track of, so
please help each other. When several effects are triggered at
the same time, the active player chooses the order, even for
other players triggered effects.
When all three global parameters (ocean, temperature, and oxygen) have reached their goals, the game ends
at the end of that generation. After the production phase,
players have one extra chance to convert plants into
greenery tiles (in player order; this may also trigger other
effects such as placement bonuses). Then the final scoring
takes place. To avoid confusion, we recommend that one
player is chosen to handle the scoring, and that all other
players check that scoring is done correctly.
Final scoring
1) TR: Your TR at the end of the game is your basic score.
Move your marker onward from this point as you add VPs
from the rest of the scoring.
2) Awards: Gives the leading player in that category 5 VPs
and the runner-up 2 VPs (except in a 2-player game). Ties
are friendly: Players at the same level get the same VPs for
1st or 2nd place. (See rules on page 11.) Add your points to
the TR-track.
3) Milestones: Each claimed Milestone is worth 5 VPs.
4) Game board: Players get VPs from the map on the game
board. Each greenery tile is worth 1 VP and each city tile is
worth 1 VP for each greenery adjacent to it (regardless of
who owns the greenery tiles). Count these in player order to
avoid confusion.
5) Cards: First count all VPs on cards that collect resources.
Then gather all of your remaining cards (including all your
played events!) and count your VPs. If you have Jovian
cards, these may have to be counted separately.
The player with the highest total score is the winner! Any
ties are won by having the most M.
Example: Stanley has a final Terraform rating of 38,
so thats where he starts counting his remaining VPs. He got
5 VPs from the award Thermalist, and he also claimed the
Planner milestone for 5 VPs. From the game board Stanley
has 3 greenery tiles around his lone city, so thats 3 VPs from
the greenery tiles and 5 VPs for the city, because it also lies
next to 2 greenery tiles owned by Robinson. This brings the
total up to 56 VPs before the cards are considered.
Stanley has 3 resources on his Livestock card, giving
him 3 VPs. He also has a total of 6 extra VPs on his other face
up cards (blue and green), and -1 VP on an event card (red),
making his final score 64 VPs.
are you a winner?
GAME VARIANTS
Corporate Era (extended game):
To play the extended game, simply add all cards
marked with a red and white icon ( )on the cards
lower left border at the start of setup, including 2 new
corporations. Players start with no extra production of
resources (see Setup - Players on page 7). Corporate Era can
be combined with any of the other game variants.
Corporate Era focuses on economy and
technology. These are projects that do not contribute
directly to the terraforming, but make the corporations
stronger, adding new strategic choices to the game.
Playing Corporate Era makes the game longer and
more complex. We do not recommend it for players new to
Terraforming Mars.
Solo variant for Corporate Era:
All rules apply as usual for solo play, with these
exceptions:
1) Before you choose your cards, place 2 neutral city tiles
on the map with an adjacent greenery tile each (these tiles
are not yours, and do not increase the oxygen level): reveal
and discard the 4 top cards of the deck and use their cost
numbers to determine the positions of the tiles. The first
city is placed counting from top left to right and down, like
reading. Skip any illegal placements (like areas reserved
for ocean). For the second city you step backwards from
bottom right in the same fashion. Then you place the two
greeneries by counting the cost numbers and stepping
clockwise around each city, starting from top left, skipping
illegal placements.
Special case: If you choose to play Tharsis Republic this
game, you get M production for the 2 neutral cities even
though they are placed before you reveal your corporation.
2) Start with a terraform rating of 14 instead of 20 (marked
solo on the track) and without the extra production of
resources decribed for the standard game.
3) Awards and Milestones are not used.
4) You have a neutral opponent that you can steal from, or
reduce any kind of resources and production from.
5) You always play 14 generations (marked solo).
In order to win, you need to complete terraforming (i.e
making the three global parameters reach their goal) before
the end of generation 14. After generation 14, you may
convert plants into greenery tiles, following normal rules
but without raising the oxygen, and finally you score VPs
to get as high a score as possible. If you have not completed
terraforming by the end of generation 14, you lose.
Draft variant:
If more interaction is desired, the Draft variant
may be used. During the Research phase the players draft 4
cards to buy from instead of just drawing 4 to buy from:
Each player first gets 4 cards and chooses one to
draft, putting it aside and passing the rest to the next player.
Then you have 3 cards; set aside 1 of them and pass the rest
to the left. Then set aside 1 of the 2 you receive, pass the last
card, and finally receive your last card.
Then examine the 4 cards youve set aside (drafted)
and choose which to buy (3 M each) and which to discard.
Drafting is not used during the first generation
since the first Research phase is skipped (see setup). Cards
are passed clockwise during even-numbered generations
and counter-clockwise during odd-numbered generations.
This variant allows players to affect which cards
other players get access to, and increases your ability to
pursue a certain strategy, or predict which parameter will
rise first.
The Draft Variant adds some extra game time and
is not recommended for players new to Terraforming Mars.
About the author:
Jacob Fryxelius got his doctoral degree in
chemistry at Stockholm University in 2006. Discovering his
passion for analyzing and explaining things, he then began
to work as a science teacher for high schools and colleges,
getting his teaching diploma in 2011.
Board games being a hobby since childhood, he
has developed several games over the years. In 2011, he
co-founded FryxGames with his
brothers Enoch, Daniel, and
Jonathan, and that same year
his game Space Station was
released.
Between his teaching
job, FryxGames, children, and
a lovely wife, life is full indeed!

SYMBOLS:
Victory points
You win the game by having the most
Victory points (VPs). VPs are scored for your
Terraform rating, from tiles on the map, from
Milestones and Awards, and from many of the
cards.
Parameters
Terraforming Mars is about making Mars earthlike enough to live freely on it. There are 4 parameters on
the game board connected to this process: Terraform rating,
temperature, oxygen level and ocean coverage.
Terraform Rating (TR) is the measure of how
much you have contributed to the terraforming
process. Each time you raise the oxygen level, the
temperature, or place an ocean tile, your TR increases as well.
Each step of TR is worth 1 VP at the end of the game, and the
Terraforming Committee awards you income according to
your TR. You start at 20.
The mean temperature at the equator is raised 2
C at a time from -30C to +8C. This will create
an equatorial zone where water stays liquid. This
symbol means that you raise the temperature 1 step,
and therefore you also increase your TR 1 step.
The oxygen level is measured as a percentage of
an atm of pressure, meaning that this percentage
is comparable to Earths 21% oxygen. At 14% the
atmosphere resembles that of Earth at a 3000 m
elevation. This symbol means that you raise the oxygen level
1 step, and therefore also increase your TR 1 step.
Each ocean tile represents 1% ocean coverage.
With 9% of the surface covered by oceans, Mars
will have a hydrological cycle, creating rain and
rivers. This symbol means that you place an ocean
tile, and therefore also increase your TR 1 step (and get any
placement bonus, see page 5).
Resources
All resources are represented by resource cubes.
These come in 3 sizes; 1 (bronze), 5 (silver) and 10 (gold) and
can be used as any kind of resource. Where you place them
determines what they are. The six standard resources are
megacredits, steel, titanium, plants, energy and heat, and
they are all collected on the player board. Certain cards can
also collect resources (usually animal and microbe cards, see
tags on next page). If a card adds a non-standard resource, it
is generally placed on that same card.
The MegaCredit (M) is the general currency used for
buying and playing cards and using standard projects,
milestones, and awards.
Steel represents building material on Mars. Usually
this means some kind of magnesium alloy. Steel is
used to pay for building cards, being worth 2 M per
steel.
Titanium represents resources in space or for the
space industry. Titanium is used to pay for space
cards, being worth 3 M per titanium.
Plants use photosynthesis. As an action, 8 plant
resources can be converted into a greenery tile that
you place on the board. This increases the oxygen
level (and your TR) 1 step. Each greenery is worth 1
VP and generates 1 VP to each adjacent city tile (see
map rules on page 5).
Energy is used by many cities and industries. This
usage may either be via an action on a blue card, or
via a decrease in energy production. Leftover energy
is converted into heat.
Heat warms up the Martian atmosphere. As an action,
8 heat resources may be spent to increase temperature
(and therefore your TR) 1 step.
Other resources (including animals and microbes) are
collected on their respective cards, which also define
what they do.
Production of a resource is depicted by having the
resource symbol in a brown production box. In
this example the symbol means that you increase
your plant production parameter on your player
board 1 step. This in turn will give you a steady income
of plant resources. Production is not limited to 10; if your
production exceeds 10, just leave the marker on 10 and start
a new marker to complement it.
Only M production can be negative (only as far as -5,
though). But since TR is added to your production, your
total income will not be negative.
Cards represent huge endeavors that players may
undertake. The cards have 0-3 different tags that
describe some thematic aspects of the card, and
that can be utilised in conjunction with certain
With the new warp drive and our experience of terraforming
Mars, it is time for the next chapter in history - it is time to
aim for the stars.
Helen Brack, Interplanetary Cinematics policy officer
other cards. Cards cost 3 M to buy into your hand during
the research phase, but have different costs to play from your
hand into play. When you encounter this symbol, it means
that you may draw a card to your hand (without paying for
it).
Tags
Cards have 0-3 tags that thematically describe them
and allow other cards to relate to them. There are no special
rules for the different tags.
Building: This project involves construction on Mars.
Steel may be used to pay for this card.
Space: This project uses space technology. Titanium may
be used to pay for this card.
Power: This project is focused on energy production or
handling.
Science: This project enhances your scientific knowledge.
Some cards require science tags.
Jovian means having to do with Jupiter. This project
represents infrastructure in the outer solar system.
Earth: This project is related to activities on Earth.
Plant: This project involves plant life or other
photosynthesizing organisms.
Microbe: This project involves microbes for specific
purposes.
Animal: This project involves animals. Generates VPs.
City: This project places a city tile. This often requires
energy production and produces M.
Event: This project is a one-time event. All events are red
cards that are turned face down after being played.
Tiles
The game board has a map where tiles may be
placed. When placing a tile, you may receive a placement
bonus printed on the area (plus 2 M for each adjacent
ocean). There are 4 kinds of tiles:
This symbol means that you place an ocean tile.
This increases your TR 1 step. There are 12 areas
on the game board that are reserved for ocean tiles;
Ocean tiles may only be placed on such areas and
no other tiles may be placed there. Ocean tiles are not owned
by any player, but generate a 2 M placement bonus each for
any player subsequently placing tiles next to them.
This symbol means that you place a greenery tile
with an owner marker (this also increases oxygen
level and TR, as indicated by the oxygen symbol).
The tile must be placed next to another tile that
you own if possible. If you have no tiles or no area next to
them, you may place it on any available area. Greenery tiles
are worth 1 VP at the end of the game, and also generate a VP
to any adjacent city (see city tile rules).
This symbol means that you place a city tile with
an owner marker. The tile may not be placed next
to another city tile. Each city tile is worth 1 VP
for each adjacent greenery tile (regardless of who
owns the greenery tile) at the end of the game.
Symbol tiles in brown mean that you place
the special tile described on the card, with an
owner marker. Any special rules and placement
restrictions are specified on the card.
Red border on icons
When an icon has a red border, it means that it
targets any player (you or an opponent).
A card that removes red-borded resources, may
remove those resources from any one player (this effect may
also be performed partly, or not at all).
A card effect that reduces production of a redbordered resource must be performed, so if your opponent
doesnt have that production, then you must lower your own
production or not play the card at all.
A card with a red-bordered tile icon targets any or
all players tiles.
A card with a red-bordered tag icon targets all cards
with that icon, whether they belong to you or another player. DANIEL FRYXELIUS
Credits
Game design: Jacob Fryxelius
Graphic design: Isaac Fryxelius
Assistant design: FryxGames
FryxGames thanks: Our partners, friends and family (especially
Mom and Dad) for playtesting and feedback. We want to
acknowledge Kim Stanley Robinson for great inspiration to this
game in his Red Mars trilogy. And, of course, eternal gratitude to
the Creator of Mars and of everything else.
We thank our beta-testers:
Geof Gambill, Lloyd Keller, Thomas & Sandra Diehl, Gerda van
Heel & Bart van Bilzen, Daisy & Christopher Swaffer, Dennis
Suijkerbuijk, Jorrit Sminia, Martin Ekelund.
All images are credited by name, and any image that has been modified by us is marked
by a + after the name.
Printed by LudoFact, Germany.
 2016 FryxGames
www.fryxgames.se/games/terraformingmars/
 2016 Stronghold Games LLC
www.StrongholdGames.com
Components list:
- 1 Rules Booklet
- 1 Game Board
- 5 Player Boards
- 17 Corporation Cards
- 208 Project Cards
- 8 Reference Cards
- 200 Player Markers (transparent plastic cubes, 5 colors)
- 200 Resource Markers (opaque plastic cubes in gold, silver, and copper in different sizes)
- 3 Game Board Markers (big white plastic cubes)
- 9 Ocean Tiles
- 60 Greenery/City Tiles
- 11 Special Tiles
- 1 First Player Marker



GAME NAME:
Twilight Struggle

Twilight Struggle "2nd Edition"
(C) 2007 GMT Games, LLC
GMT Games, LLC - P.O. Box 1308, Hanford, CA 93232-1308
www.GMTGames.com 0510
RULE BOOK
by Jason Matthews & Ananda Gupta
1. Introduction........................................................... 2
2. Components.......................................................... 2
3. Game Setup........................................................... 3
4. Game Sequence .................................................... 3
5. Card Play .............................................................. 4
6. Operations............................................................. 6
7. Events ................................................................... 8
8. DEFCON Status and Military Operations............ 8
9. China..................................................................... 9

TABLE OF CONTENTS:
10. Scoring and Victory .............................................. 10
11. Tournament Play................................................... 11
12. The Chinese Civil War Variant ............................. 11
A Late War Scenario .................................................... 12
Game Credits ............................................................... 13
Designer Optional Rules ............................................. 13
Extended Example of Play........................................... 14
Card Histories .............................................................. 21
Designers Notes.......................................................... 31
Deluxe Edition

1.0 INTRODUCTION
Now the trumpet summons us again not as a call to bear
arms, though arms we need, not as a call to battle, though
embattled we are but a call to bear the burden of a long
twilight struggle..."
--John F. Kennedy, Inaugural Speech, January 1961
In 1945, unlikely allies slew the Nazi beast, while humanitys
most devastating weapons forced the proud Japanese Empire to
its knees in a storm of fire. Where once there stood many great
powers, now stood only two. The world had scant time to sigh
relief before a new conflict threatened. Unlike the titanic conflicts
of the preceding decades, this conflict would be waged primarily
not by soldiers and tanks, but by spies and politicians, scientists
and intellectuals, artists and traitors.
Twilight Struggle is a two-player game simulating the forty-fiveyear dance of intrigue, prestige, and occasional flares of warfare
between the Soviet Union and the United States. The entire world
is the stage on which these two titans fight to make the world
safe for their own ideologies and ways of life. The game begins
amidst the ruins of Europe as the two new superpowers struggle
over the wreckage of the Second World War, and ends in 1989,
when only the United States remained standing.
Twilight Struggle inherits its fundamental systems from the carddriven classics We the People and Hannibal: Rome vs. Carthage.
It is a quick-playing, low-complexity game in that tradition.
Event cards cover a vast array of historical happenings, from
the Arab-Israeli conflicts of 1948 and 1967, to Vietnam and the
U.S. peace movement, to the Cuban Missile Crisis and other
such incidents that brought the world to the brink of nuclear
annihilation. Subsystems capture the prestige-laden Space Race
as well as nuclear tensions, with the possibility of nuclear war
ending the game.
These rules are organized into numbered sections, with some
sections further subdivided into subsections (for example, 2.1
and 2.2). In a number of places in the rules, you will see references made to rules sections and subsections that are related to
the one you are reading.
Additionally, terms that have specialized meaning within these
rules, such as Influence or Battleground, are consistently capitalized to allude to their specialized context within the rules.

2.0 COMPONENTS:
A complete game of Twilight Struggle includes the following:
- One 22 by 34 Map Board
- Two sheets of markers
- One Rules Booklet
- Two Player Aid Cards
- 110 Cards
- Two 6-sided dice
2.1 THE GAME MAP
"From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic, an iron
curtain has descended across the continent."
--Winston Churchill
2.1.1 The map is divided into six Regions: Europe, Asia, Central
America, South America, Africa, and the Middle East. A region
is a group of geopolitically connected nations, normally in close
geographic proximity. Europe is divided into two sub-regions,
Eastern Europe and Western Europe. Two historically neutral
countries (Austria and Finland) are categorized as being in
both Eastern and Western Europe.
Asia also contains a sub-region,
Southeast Asia. The country spaces
that comprise a region share a map
color. Sub-regions have shades of the
same color.
DESIGN NOTE: Although not exactly geographically correct,
the Middle East includes Libya and Egypt for political purposes,
while Canada and Turkey are included in the Europe Region.
2.1.2 Any event, rule, action, or card that refers to Europe or
Asia includes the associated sub-regions.
2.1.3 Each space on the map represents a country or bloc of
countries (hereafter simply called a country). Each country has
a Stability Number representing the countrys overall stability,
independence and power.
2.1.4 Battleground States. While most states have their names
on white, Battleground countries operate the same way as normal
spaces but have special rules for scoring (see 10.1) and coup
attempts (6.3). Their country name is highlighted in purple for
easy recognition.
2.2.4 Many cards have an asterisk following their Event title.
When these cards are played as Events, they are removed permanently from the game.
2.2.5 Cards that have their Event title underlined are displayed
face-up on the side of the game board until they are cancelled
(or the game ends).
PLAY NOTE: Players may also indicate the play of underlined
events with the numbered card reminder markers. They may be
placed on map in the Events in Effect Box.
2.2.6 Cards that are discarded (not permanently removed from the
game) are placed in a face up pile adjacent to the draw pile.
2.3 MARKERS
The game includes various markers to assist play:
2.1.5 There are two spaces on the map representing the geographic locations of the United States and the Soviet Union.
They are out of play for Influence Markers, but are considered
adjacent controlled countries for the purposes of events, and
realignments (6.2.2).
2.1.6 Countries are connected to one another via the black, red
and brown lines on the map. Brown lines represent connections
within a region. Red dashed lines represent connections between
countries in different regions. The black lines indicate connections between countries and superpowers. A country is considered
adjacent to all other countries to which it is connected.
DESIGN NOTE: Being adjacent is not entirely a reflection of
geography. Several countries that share physical boundaries do
not have connections in the game. This is not a map error but
is part of the mechanics of the game and the political situation
of the times.
2.1.7 Controlling Countries: Each country on the map is considered Controlled by one of the players, or it is uncontrolled. A
country is considered Controlled by a player if:
- The player has Influence points in the country greater than or
equal to the countrys Stability Number, and
- The players Influence in the country exceeds his/her opponents Influence in that country by at least the countrys
Stability Number.
EXAMPLE: To Control Israel (Stability Number 4), a player must
have at least 4 Influence points in Israel, and must have at least
4 more Influence points in Israel than his/her opponent has.

2.2 CARDS:
2.2.1 There are 110 cards used in the game. Each card contains
an Operations Point value, an Event Title and an Event Description. Some cards are labeled SCORING, which must be played
sometime during the turn they are drawn.
2.2.2 Each card has a symbol to indicate which superpower is
associated with its Event, as follows:
- Cards with a Red star only are associated with the USSR
- Cards with a White star only are associated with the US
- Cards with a split Red/White star are not associated with either
side.
(See 5.2 for the effect of playing cards whose Events are associated with your opponents superpower.)
2.2.3 Cards may be played in one of two ways, as Events or
Operations.

3.0 GAME SETUP:
3.1 Shuffle the Early War cards and deal each player 8 cards. In
addition, place The China Card face up in front of the USSR
player. The players are allowed to examine their cards prior to
deploying their initial Influence markers.
3.2 The USSR player sets up first. The USSR places a total of
15 Influence markers in the following locations: 1 in Syria, 1
in Iraq, 3 in North Korea, 3 in East Germany, 1 in Finland, and
6 anywhere in Eastern Europe.
3.3 The US player sets up second, placing a total of 25 Influence
markers in the following locations: 2 in Canada, 1 in Iran, 1 in
Israel, 1 in Japan, 4 in Australia, 1 in the Philippines, 1 in South
Korea, 1 in Panama, 1 in South Africa, 5 in the United Kingdom,
and 7 anywhere in Western Europe.
3.4 Place the US and USSR Space Race markers to the left of
the Space Race track. Each player places his Military OP marker
on the zero space of their respective Military Operations Track.
Place the Turn marker on the first space of the Turn Record
Track. Place the Defcon marker on the 5 space of the DEFCON
Track. Finally, place the VP marker on the Victory Points Track
on the zero space.

4.0 GAME SEQUENCE:
4.1 Twilight Struggle has ten turns. Each turn represents between
three and five years, and will involve six or seven normal card
plays by each player. At the beginning of the game, each player
receives eight cards from the Early War deck. At the beginning
of turn 4, the Mid War deck is shuffled into the draw pile and the
players hand size increases to nine. At the beginning of turn 8,
the Late War deck is shuffled into the draw pile.
4.2 The Phasing Player is the player whose Action Round is
currently being played.
4.3 When there are no cards remaining in the draw deck, reshuffle
all discards to form a new draw deck. Note that cards played as
Events with an asterisk (*) are removed from the game when they
are played, and are not shuffled into the new draw deck.
4.3.1 Deal all cards remaining in the draw deck before reshuffling, except in turns 4 and 8 (see 4.4.).
4.4 When moving from the Early War deck to Mid War, or from
Mid War to Late War, do not add in the discards to the deckinstead add the Mid War or Late War cards (as appropriate) to the
existing deck and reshuffle. The ignored discards remain in the
discard pile for now, but will be reshuffled into the deck in the
next reshuffle.
4.5 A turn in Twilight Struggle has the following structure:
A. Improve DEFCON Status
B. Deal Cards
C. Headline Phase
D. Action Rounds
E. Check Military Operations Status
F. Reveal Held Card (Tournament only)
G. Flip The China Card
H. Advance Turn Marker
I. Final Scoring (after Turn 10 only)
A. Improve DEFCON Status: If the DEFCON level is lower
than 5, add one to the DEFCON status (towards Peace).
B. Deal Cards: Each player receives enough cards to bring their
total hand size to 8 on turns 1-3. On turns 4-10, players should
receive enough cards to bring their total hand size to 9. The
China Card is never included in this total.
C. Headline Phase: Each player secretly selects a card from
their hand. Once both players have made their choice, they reveal
their cards to each other simultaneously. These cards are called
Headline cards and their Events take place in this phase (and
if the event title has an asterisk, are removed from the game
normally). To determine which Event takes place first, look at
the Operations value on each card; that is its Headline Value.
The card with the higher Headline Value takes effect first. In
the event of a tie, the Headline Event played by the US player
goes into effect first.
- Scoring cards may be played during the Headline Phase. However, they are considered to have a Headline Value of zero (0)
and always take effect second. If both players select a scoring
card as their Headline Cards, the US players scoring card
takes effect first.
- Players must create a Headline event, regardless of whether
the event helps them or their opponent.
NOTE: If playing an opponents event during the Headline phase,
your opponent implements the event text as if they had played the
card themselves. However, the player of the headline card would
be considered the phasing player for purposes of the DEFCON
status (see 8.1.3).
- The China Card may not be played during the Headline
Phase.
- Unless the headline event specifically refers to availability of
operations points, neither player receives operations points
from cards played during the headline phase.
D. Action Rounds: There are six Action Rounds in turns 1 to
3 and seven action rounds turns 4 to 10. Players alternate playing cards, one per Action Round, for a total of six cards during
turns 1 to 3, and seven cards during turns 4 to 10. The USSR
player always takes his or her Action Round first, followed by
the US player. All actions required by each card must be resolved
before the next player starts his or her Action Round by playing
a card. The player taking his or her Action Round is called the
Phasing Player.
- Ordinarily, a player will have a card left over after the completion of all Action Rounds. This card is considered held, and
may be played in subsequent rounds. Scoring cards may never
be held.
- If a player has insufficient cards to take the requisite number
of actions for the turn, that player must sit out of the remaining Action Rounds while the opposing player completes the
turn.
E. Check Military Operations Phase: Each player determines
if they are penalized Victory Points for failing to perform enough
Military Operations during the turn (see 8.2). Each player then
resets his Military Operations markers back to zero.
F. Reveal Held Card: During Tournament or competitive play,
both players should reveal any held cards to their opponents
to ensure that all required scoring cards are played during the
round. Since this detracts from some elements of secrecy in the
game, it is not necessary to use this rule in a non-competitive
environment.
G. Flip China Card: If The China Card was passed face-down
during the turn, flip it face-up now.
H. Advance Turn Marker: Move the Turn Marker to the next
turn. If it is the end of turn 3, shuffle the Mid War cards into the
draw deck. If it is the end of turn 7, shuffle the Late war cards
into the draw deck.
I. Final Scoring: At the end of turn 10, perform Final Scoring
as described in the Scoring rules.

5.0 CARD PLAY:
5.1 Cards may be played in one of two ways: as Events or Operations. Ordinarily, players will hold one card in their hand at
the end of the turn. All other cards will be used for events or
operations. Players may not forgo their turn by declining to play
a card, or by discarding a card from their hand.
5.2 Events Associated With Your Opponent: If a player plays
a card as an Operation, and the cards Event is associated only
with his opponent, the Event still occurs (and the card, if it has
an asterisk after the Event title, is removed).
NOTE: When playing a card for operations and it triggers your
opponents event, your opponent implements the event text as if
they had played the card themselves.
- The phasing player always decides whether the event is to take
place before or after the Operations are conducted.
- If a card play triggers an opponents Event, but that Event
cannot occur because a prerequisite card has not been played,
or a condition expressed in the Event has not been met, the
Event does not occur. In this instance, cards with an asterisk
Event (marked *) are returned to the discard pile, not removed
from the game.
- If a card play triggers an opponents Event, but play of that
event has been prohibited by a superseding Event card, then
the Event does not occur, and the card remains in play for
Operations points only.
- If a card play triggers an opponents Event, but the event results
in no effect, the Event is still considered played, and would
still be removed if it has an asterisk.
EXAMPLE 1: The USSR player plays the NATO card before the
Marshall Plan or Warsaw Pact cards have been played. The
USSR player would get the benefit of the 4 Operations points,
but the US would not get the NATO event. However, despite
being asterisked, the NATO card would not be removed from
play. It would be placed in the discard pile to be reshuffled and
possibly played later.
EXAMPLE 2: The US player plays Arab-Israeli War for 2 Operations. However, during his previous Action Round he played
Camp David Accords which prohibits play of Arab-Israeli War
as an Event. The US player would still conduct 2 Operations,
but the USSR player would not get the benefit of the Event, and
the card would not be eliminated from the game.
EXAMPLE 3: The USSR Player plays Alliance for Progress;
however, the US Player does not control a Battleground country
in either South or Central America. Nevertheless, the Event is
considered played, and the card would be removed from the game
after the USSR players round.
EXAMPLE 4: The USSR player plays Star Wars, but the US
player is ahead on the Space Race track. The result is no effect
and the Star Wars card is returned to the discard pile.
5.3 When a card played as an Event requires the play or discard
of another card of a specific value, a higher valued card will
always satisfy the requirement.
EXAMPLE: The Quagmire card requires the US player to discard a 2 Operations card. If the US plays a 3 Operations card,
the requirement is still met.
5.4 When an event forces a player to discard a card, the Event
on the discarded card is not implemented. This rule also applies
to Scoring cards.
5.5 Except as noted in rule 10.1.5, card text that contradicts the
written rules supersedes the written rules.
Allows play of NATO.
Event may not be used
before NATO is played.

6.1.3 Influence markers may be placed in multiple regions and
multiple countries up to the number of Operations Points on the
card played.
EXAMPLE: The US player has existing markers in Panama and
South Korea. The US player uses a 3 Operations Point card
to place more influence. The US player may place Influence
markers in both Costa Rica and Colombia. However, he cannot
place Influence markers in Costa Rica and then Nicaragua. On
the other hand, since Influence markers are already present, he
could use any remaining operation points to strengthen South
Korea or its neighboring countries.
6.1.4 Influence markers may always be placed in any country
that is adjacent (connected) to the phasing players superpower
space.
6.1.5 Influence markers are treated like cash. Players may
break a large denomination into smaller denominations at any
time. Additionally, the number of Influence markers included
in the game is not an absolute limit. Small poker chips, coins
or wooden blocks can be utilized to substitute in the event of a
marker shortage.
6.1.6 If a player has two or more markers in a country, place
the larger denomination on top. Influence markers are open to
inspection at all times.
6.2 REALIGNMENT ROLLS
6.2.1 Realignment rolls are used to reduce enemy Influence in
a country. To attempt a Realignment roll, the acting player need
not have any Influence in the target country or in any adjacent
country--although this improves the chance of success greatly.
When using a card for Realignment rolls, the player may resolve
each roll before declaring the next target. Countries may be targeted for Realignment more than once per Action Round.
6.2.2 It costs one Operations point to make a Realignment roll.
Each player rolls a die and the high roller may remove the difference between the rolls from their opponents Influence in the
target country. Ties are considered a draw, and no markers are
removed. Each player modifies his die roll:
- +1 for each adjacent controlled country,
- +1 if they have more Influence in the target country than their
opponent,
- +1 if your Superpower is adjacent to the target country.

6.0 OPERATIONS:
Operations can be used in the following ways: to place Influence
markers, to make Realignment rolls, to attempt Coups, or to attempt advancement in the Space Race. When a card is played as
an Operations card, the player must choose to use all of the Operations points on one of the following options: Marker Placement,
Realignment rolls, Coup Attempts or a Space Race attempt.
6.1 PLACING INFLUENCE MARKERS
Everyone imposes his own system as far as his army can
reach. --Joseph Stalin
6.1.1 Influence markers are placed one at a time. However, all
markers must be placed with, or adjacent to, friendly markers that
were in place at the start of the phasing players Action Round.
Exception: markers placed when required by an Event are not
subject to this restriction, unless specifically stated otherwise on
the card. If the amount of influence is sufficent to gain control
of the country, place the marker on its darker side.
6.1.2 It costs one (1) Operations point to place an Influence
marker in a country that is friendly-Controlled or uncontrolled.
It costs two (2) Operations points to place an Influence marker
in an enemy-Controlled country. If a countrys Control status
changes while placing Influence markers, additional markers
placed during that Action Round are placed at the lower cost.
EXAMPLE: The US player has 2 Influence markers in Turkey and
the USSR player has none. Therefore, the US controls Turkey. The
USSR player uses a 4 Operations point card to place Influence
markers. When placing markers in Turkey, the first marker costs
2 Operations points. However, after placement of the first USSR
influence marker, the US no longer exceeds USSR influence in
Turkey by the Stability Number of 2, thus, a second or third Soviet
influence marker would only cost 1 operation point per marker. If
the US player started with only 1 influence marker in Turkey, the
US player would not control Turkey. Therefore, any Soviet influence
placement would only cost 1 operations point per marker.
EXAMPLE: The US player controls Turkey and Greece and the
USSR player controls Syria and Lebanon. Neither player controls
Romania and Bulgaria
EXAMPLE: The US player targets North Korea for Realignment.
There are 3 USSR Influence points in North Korea, while the US
player has none. The US player has no modifiershe does not
control any adjacent countries and has less Influence in North
Korea then the Soviets. The USSR player has +1 because North
Korea is adjacent to the USSR and +1 for having more Influence
in North Korea then the US. The US player gets lucky and rolls
a 5 while the USSR player rolls a 2 which is modified to 4. The
result is the USSR player must remove one Influence point from
North Korea.
6.2.3 No Influence is ever added to a country as a result of a
Realignment roll.
6.3 COUP ATTEMPTS
6.3.1 A Coup represents operations short of full-scale war to
change the composition of a target countrys government. A
player attempting a Coup need not have any Influence in the
target country or in an adjacent country to attempt the Coup.
However, your opponent must have Influence markers in the
target country for a Coup to be attempted.
6.3.2 To resolve a Coup attempt, multiply the Stability Number
of the target country by two (x2). Then roll a die and add the
Operations points on the card to it. If this modified die roll is
greater than the doubled stability number, the coup is successful, otherwise it fails. If the coup is successful remove opposing
Influence markers equal to the difference from the target country.
If there are insufficient opposing Influence markers to remove,
add friendly Influence markers to make up the difference.
6.3.3 Move the marker on the Military Operations track up
the number of spaces equal to the Operations value of the card
played.
EXAMPLE: The US player plays a 3 Operations card to conduct
a coup attempt in Mexico. The US player has no Influence in
Mexico; the USSR player has 2 Influence points. First the US
player adjusts his marker on the Military Operations Track to
show that he has spent three points on
Military Operations this turn (see 8.2).
Then he rolls the die for a 4 and adds his
Operations Number (3) to get a 7. He
now subtracts twice the value of Mexicos
Stability Number (2x2=4) from this result
to get a final total of 3. This is the number of Influence markers he may remove
from/add to Mexico. First, the US would
remove the 2 Soviet Influence markers,
then place 1 US Influence marker.
6.3.4 Any Coup attempt in a Battleground country degrades the
DEFCON status one level (towards Nuclear War).
6.3.5 Cards that state a player may make a free Coup roll in a
particular region may ignore the geographic restrictions of the
current DEFCON level (see 8.1.5). However, a free Coup roll
used against a Battleground country would still lower DEFCON
as per 6.3.4.
6.4 THE SPACE RACE
We go into space because whatever mankind must undertake,
free men must fully share . . . I believe that this nation should
commit itself to achieving the goal, before the decade is out,
of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to the
earth. --John F. Kennedy
6.4.1 The Space Race track contains a marker for each superpower. Operations points may be spent by a superpower to attempt
to move its marker to the next box on the track. To do so, play
a card with an Operations point value equal to or greater than
the number shown on the track into which you are attempting to
advance. Roll the die: if the number falls within the range listed
in the target box on the Space Race track, move your marker to
the new box.
6.4.2 A player may only play 1 card per turn in an attempt to
advance in the Space Race. Exception: Space Race Track Special
Abilities and certain Events may alter this one-card limitation, or
advance the superpowers marker on the Space Race track.
6.4.3 Advancing along the Space Race track results in an award
of Victory Points, a special ability, or both. Five boxes on the
Space Race track are marked with two numbers divided by a
slash, e.g. Lunar Orbit has the numbers 3/1. The left-hand number is the number of Victory Points awarded to the first player to
reach that box; the right-hand number is the number of Victory
Points awarded to the second player to reach that box. Victory
Points granted take effect immediately. All Space Race Victory
Points are cumulative.
6.4.4 Special abilities are granted only to the first player to reach
the space. The special effect is immediately cancelled when the
second player reaches that box.
- Upon reaching space 2 (Animal in Space), the player is allowed
to play two Space Race cards per turn (instead of the usual
one).
- Upon reaching space 4 (Man in Earth Orbit), the opposing
player must select and reveal his or her Headline Event before
the player with a Man in Earth Orbit makes his/her Headline
Event selection.
- Upon reaching space 6 (Eagle/Bear has Landed), the player
may discard their Held Card at the end of the turn
- Upon reaching space 8 (Space Station), the player may play
eight (8) Action Rounds per turn.
The effects of these special abilities are immediate and cumulative.
EXAMPLE: The USSR player successfully reaches space 2.
He may play a second Space Race Card during his next Action
Round. If the USSR player reached space 4 before the US player
had reached space 2, the USSR player could play two Space Race
cards per turn, and require the US Player to show his Headline
Phase event before selecting his own.
6.4.5 Regardless of text on the card, an Event discarded to make
a die roll to advance on the Space Race track is not implemented.
The card is placed in the discard pile.
DESIGN NOTE: The Space Race is your safety valve. If you
hold a card whose Event is a good one for your opponent, and
you dont want the Event to occur, you can dump it on the Space
Race (provided it has enough Operations points to qualify for
an attempt to move forward).
6.4.6 If a player reaches the final box in the Space Race, no more
cards may be expended in the Space Race by that player for the
remainder of the game.

7.0 EVENTS:
Do you, Ambassador Zorin, deny that the USSR has placed and
is placing medium -- and intermediate -- range missiles and sites
in Cuba? Yes or no? Dont wait for the translation! Yes or no?
--Adlai Stevenson, U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations
7.1 A player may play a card as an Event instead of Operations.
If the Event is associated with his or her own superpower, or is
associated with both superpowers, it takes effect as directed by
the cards text.
7.2 The Southeast Asia Scoring card has an asterisk following the
Event title, and is the only scoring card removed after play.
7.3 Permanent Events: Some Event cards have an underlined
title, e.g. Flower Power. This indicates that the effects of these
Events last for the duration of the game. When such cards are
played as Events, place them to the side of the map, or place
their markers on the Turn Track, as a reminder of their ongoing
effects.
7.4 Some event cards modify the Operations value of cards that
follow. These modifiers should be applied in aggregate, and can
modify The China Card.
EXAMPLE: The US player plays the Red Scare/Purge event
during the Headline Phase. Ordinarily, all USSR cards would
subtract one from their Operations value. However, for his
Headline card, the USSR played Vietnam Revolts. This event
gives the Soviet player +1 to all operations played in SE Asia.
For his first play, the USSR chooses The China Card. He plays
all points in SE Asia for 5 operations points. This is modified by
the Vietnam Revolts card, giving the USSR player 6 operation
points. However, the US Red Scare/Purge card brings the total
down to 5 operations points.
7.4.1 Events modifying the Operations value of a card only apply
to one player. The modifier is not transferable to their opponent
by virtue of a card taken from their opponents hand.
EXAMPLE: The USSR player has played Brezhnev Doctrine
as an Event, and therefore receives a +1 Operations value
modifier for all of his cards. If the US player steals one of his
cards, for example by playing Grain Sales to the Soviets, the
US player does not benefit from a +1 Operations value modifier
on that card.
7.4.2 Events modifying the Operations value of subsequently
played cards do so for all purposes.
EXAMPLE 1: If the Soviet player has played Red Scare/Purge
on the US player, and the US player played a 2 Operations card
for a Coup, the US player would only add 1 to his Coup roll for
the value of the card, and would receive 1 point of the Required
Military Operations track.
EXAMPLE 2: If the Soviet player played Brezhnev Doctrine
earlier in the turn, he could play a 1 Op card to make a required
roll under Bear Trap.
EXAMPLE 3: If the US player played Containment earlier in the
turn, he could play CIA Created subsequently and use 2 Ops.
7.5 If an Event becomes unplayable due to its cancellation or
restriction by another Event card, the unplayable Event card may
still be used for its Operations value.
7.6 War Events: There are 5 War Events in the deck: Korean
War, Arab-Israeli War, Indo-Pakistani War, Brush War, and
Iran-Iraq War. These Events may be played regardless of the
absence of either players influence points in either the attacking
or defending countries. If there is no influence at risk in the war,
the Events player still receives victory points upon success, and
required military operations irrespective of success (see 8.2.4)
8.0 DEFCON STATUS AND
MILITARY OPERATIONS
Strange game. The only winning move is not to play.
--Joshua the N.O.R.A.D computer from Wargames.
8.1 The DEFCON Track
8.1.1 DEFCON status measures nuclear tension in the game. The
DEFCON level begins the game at its maximum peace level
of 5. It can go down and back up due to events and actions by
the players, but if, at any point, it decreases to 1, the game ends
immediately.
8.1.2 The DEFCON status may never Improve above 5. Any
event that would Improve the DEFCON status above 5 has no
DEFCON effect.
8.1.3 If DEFCON 1 status is reached, nuclear war breaks out and
the game ends immediately. The phasing player is responsible for
the status marker moving to DEFCON 1, and loses the game.
EXAMPLE: The US player plays Olympic Games, and the DEFCON status is at 2. The USSR player boycotts the game. The
Twilight Struggle 2nd Edition
 2007 GMT Games, LLC
DEFCON status is degraded to level 1, and nuclear war is triggered. The US player, as the phasing player, has lost.
8.1.4 Any Coup attempt in a Battleground country degrades the
DEFCON status one level.
8.1.5 The consequences of the DEFCON status levels are on the
DEFCON Track, and are reproduced here:
- DEFCON 5: No effect
- DEFCON 4: No Coup or Realignment rolls are permitted in
Europe.
- DEFCON 3: No Coup or Realignment rolls are permitted in
Europe or Asia.
- DEFCON 2: No Coup or Realignment rolls are permitted in
Europe, Asia, or the Middle East.
- DEFCON 1: Game over. The player responsible for the status
going to 1 (the Phasing Player) loses the game.
PLAY NOTE: Players may place a DEFCON Restriction marker in the region to serve as a reminder
that no Realignment or Coups are permitted.
8.1.6 Improve DEFCON Status Phase. At the beginning of
any turn in which the DEFCON status is lower than 5, Improve
the DEFCON status by 1.
8.1.7 Improve & Degrade. In all cases, when the rules or cards
indicate to improve the DEFCON status, this means to move
the DEFCON marker to a higher DEFCON number, while degrade means to move the DEFCON marker to a lower DEFCON
number.
8.2 Required Military Operations
Restraint? Why are you so concerned with saving their lives?
The whole idea is to kill the bastards. At the end of the war, if
there are two Americans and one Russian left alive, we win.
--Gen. Thomas Power, U.S. Strategic Air Command
8.2.1 By the end of each turn, each
player must have played a certain
number of Military Operations. Failure
to do so gives Victory Points to your
opponent. The number of Military Operations required each turn
is equal to the current DEFCON status number. If fewer Military
Operations are carried out, the opponent gains 1 VP per unplayed
Military Operations point.
EXAMPLE: At the end of the turn the US player has spent two
points in Military Operations. If the DEFCON level is currently
at 4 the USSR player would gain 2 Victory Points.
8.2.2 Coup attempts and war events are Military Operations.
Realignment Rolls are not considered Military Operations.
8.2.3 When Operations points are played in a Coup attempt, or
when a War Event card is played (e.g., Arab-Israeli War, Korean
War, etc.), the phasing player moves his marker on the Military
Operations track a number of spaces equal to the Operations
value of the card.
8.2.4 If a player uses a card for Operations points, and thereby
triggers a War Event associated with his opponent, his opponents
Military marker is moved on the Military Operations track as
directed by the Event text.
EXAMPLE: The US player uses the Arab-Israeli War card
for Operations points, thereby also triggering the War Event
(as it is associated with the Soviet Union player). In addition
to the Event taking place as directed on the card, the USSR
player moves his Military Operations marker two spaces on the
Military Operations track.
8.2.5 Events that allow a free Coup roll do not count towards
required Military Operations.

9.0 CHINA:
9.1 Chinas role in the Cold War
is abstracted through The China
Card. Either player may play
The China Card as if it were part
of his regular hand. The China
Card does not count towards the
hand limit.
9.2 Every play of The China
Card counts as one of the Actions
(6 or 7) that a player is permitted
during a turn. As a result, players
may have more cards left in their
hand than usual, if The China
Card is played.
9.3 When The China Card is played, it is immediately handed
to your opponent face down. It may not be played again by your
opponent this turn. At the end of the turn, it is flipped face up,
ready for your opponent to play.
9.4 If The China Card is passed as a result of an Event, the card
is passed face up and may be played by the new owning player
during the same turn.
9.5 The China Card may not be played:
- during the Headline Phase,
- if it prevents the play of a Scoring card, or
- as a discard required by an Event.
9.6 To receive the bonus +1 Operations point indicated on The
China Card, all of the Operations Points on the card must be
spent in Asia (including Southeast Asia).
9.7 The Operations Point value of The China Card may be
modified by other Event Cards.
9.8 Play of The China Card can never be compelled by events
or a shortage of cards during the action rounds.

10.0 SCORING AND VICTORY:
The object of the game is to score Victory Points (VPs). Regional Victory Points are scored through geographic Influence
over the six Regions. VPs can
also be received through the play
of certain Events. Each region has
its own scoring card. Playing a
scoring card causes Victory Points
to be scored, based on how much
influence each superpower has in
that region at the time the card is
played.
PLAY NOTE: Trying to play scoring cards to coincide with your
superpowers peak influence in a
region is often a crucial factor in
winning the game.

10.1 SCORING:
10.1.1 The following terms are used during Regional Scoring:
Presence: A superpower has Presence in a Region if it Controls
at least one country in that Region.
Domination: A superpower achieves Domination of a Region if
it Controls more countries in that Region than its opponent, and
it Controls more Battleground countries in that Region than its
opponent. A superpower must Control at least one non-Battleground and one Battleground country in a Region in order to
achieve Domination of that Region.
Control: A superpower has Control of a Region if it Controls
more countries in that Region than its opponent, and Controls
all of the Battleground countries in that Region.
10.1.2 Players score additional points during Regional Scoring,
as follows:
- +1 VP per country they Control in the scoring region that is
adjacent to the enemy superpower
- +1 VP per Battleground country that they Control in the scoring region.
- Victory points are then cumulated for both players, and the net
difference between the two scores is marked on the Victory
Point Track.
EXAMPLE: The USSR plays the Central American Scoring
card. The USSR controls Cuba, Haiti and the Dominican Republic. The United States controls Guatemala, and has 1 point
of influence in Panama. The USSR player would therefore get
points for Dominating Central America (3 VPs) + 1 VP for control of a battleground country (Cuba). +1 VP for Cubas being
adjacent to your opponents home nation for a total of 5 VPs.
The United States would receive 1 VP for presence in Central
America since he controls Guatemala. Since the United States
only has 1 Influence point in Panama, he does not control it,
and therefore controls no battleground countries. That is why
the USSR player scores Dominance points. He controls more
battleground countries (Cuba) and more countries overall. He
also meets the at least one non-battleground country test
through control of either Haiti or the Dominican Republic. Having calculated relative victory points, 5 VPs for the USSR, and
1 VP for the US, you subtract the US VPs from the Soviets, and
move the VP point track a net 4 spaces toward Soviet victory.
10.1.3 Playing certain card Events may result in Victory Points
being scored.
10.1.4 Victory Points may be scored due to your opponents
failure to perform the number of required military operations
during the turn (8.2).
10.1.5 A player may not be forced to Hold a Scoring Card through
the effects of an Event(s).
10.2 The Victory Point Track
10.2.1 The Victory Point Track shows a range of scoring possibilities from US-20 (US automatic victory) to USSR-20 (USSR automatic victory). At the start of the game, place the VP marker in the
center of the chart, on the box marked At Start. This box represents
zero points, or total equilibrium of the two sides. This box should
be counted as a space when players scores are adjusted.
EXAMPLE: If the scoring marker is on the USSR-1 box, and
the US player scores 2 VPs, the marker should move 2 spaces
to the US-1 box.
10.2.2 Wherever a card states that the player gains a Victory
Point, this means that the VP marker is moved that many spaces
in that players favor, i.e., if the VP marker is on the 10 space
(US winning) and the USSR player gains 2 VP, the marker is
moved to the 8 space on the VP track.
10.2.3 If both players earn Victory Points from the same card
or Event play, apply only the difference in Victory Points
awarded.

10.3 VICTORY:
10.3.1 Automatic Victory. There are several ways to achieve an
automatic victory in Twilight Struggle:
- The instant one player reaches a score of 20 VP, the game is
over and that player is the winner. NOTE: All VP awards (for
both players) that are scored during an event or scoring card
must be applied prior to determining automatic victory.
- If either side Controls Europe, that side wins when the Europe
Scoring card is played.
- Nuclear War: A player may also win the instant his opponent
causes the DEFCON level to reach 1.
10.3.2 End Game Victory. If neither side has achieved victory
of any kind by the end of turn 10, then every Region is scored
as if its regional scoring card had just been played (these new
VPs are added to the current score). Southeast Asia is not scored
separately: it is included in the Asia scoring calculations. Every
Regions score must be calculated before final victory is determined. Reaching 20 VPs does not result in Automatic Victory
during scoring at the end of turn 10; however, Control of Europe
does grant automatic victory to the controlling player, regardless
of scoring elsewhere.
Once all regions have been scored, victory goes to the player who
has accrued most VPs. If the VP marker is on a positive number,
the US wins; if the VP marker is on a negative number, the USSR
wins. If the VP marker is on zero, the game ends in a draw.

11.0 TOURNAMENT PLAY:
These rules are optional, and are not required for friendly play.
They are simply offered as guidelines on conducting Twilight
Struggle as a competitive tournament game.
11.1.1 During tournament play, all cards held at the end of the
round should be revealed to your opponent. This prevents accidental or deliberate holding of scoring cards.
11.1.2 Any player found holding a scoring card during the Reveal
Held Card phase is said to have started an accidental nuclear war,
and loses immediately.
11.1.3 During tournament play, the Soviet player should receive
the first card of every deal. The deal should alternate back and
forth between the players until they have received their full
hand size. A player may receive consecutive cards in a deal if
they require more cards than their opponent.

12.0 THE CHINESE CIVIL WAR:
VARIANT
The Chinese Civil War Variant
is meant to be played within
the context of the existing
rules regarding the China
Card (see 9.0). However,
where these rules conflict with
existing rules or event card
text, this section of the rules
takes precedence.
12.1 The Chinese Civil War space
The Chinese Civil War space is considered adjacent to the Soviet
Union and only the Soviet Union. The space is considered to be
in Asia, but not South East Asia. It does not affect any scoring
card. The only action that may be taken on the Chinese Civil War
space is the placement of Influence Points by the Soviet player.
The US player may not use Operations or events of any kind to
effect the Chinese Civil War space. Once the Soviet player has
placed 3 Influence Points on the Chinese Civil War space, it has
no further effect. The markers may be returned to the Soviet
players pool, and the Chinese Civil War space is ignored for
the remainder of the game.
12.2 Control
The Soviet Union must place three Influence on the Chinese
Civil War space to Control it. Soviet Influence is placed in the
Chinese Civil War space according to the rules for placing influence in countries (see 6.1). If the China card remains unclaimed
throughout the game, no player receives the victory point for
possession of the China Card during end game scoring.
12.3 Impact of Control
Until the Soviet Player has placed 3 Influence Points on the
Chinese Civil War space, the China Card is in no players possession. Once the Soviet player had placed 3 Influence Points
into the space, the player immediately receives the China Card
face up and ready for play. Additionally, the ban on play of the
Red Scare/Purge and Formosan Resolution events is immediately lifted.
12.4 Event Restrictions
Until the Soviet player has placed 3 Influence Points on the
Chinese Civil War space, the Soviet player may not play Red
Scare/Purge nor Cultural Revolution as events. Additionally,
the US player may not play Formosan Resolution as an event.
These cards may be played for Operations Points normally.
12.4.1 Special US Condition: For the purposes of playing Ussuri River Skirmish or Nixon Plays the China Card as events,
the US is deemed to be in possession of the China Card if the
Soviet Player has not yet placed the 3 Influence Points on the
Chinese Civil War space.
12.4.2 Until the Soviet Player has placed 3 Influence Points
on the Chinese Civil War space the Russian player subtracts
an additional 1 when rolling for the resolution of the Korean
War event.
12.4.3 Events made unplayable or restricted due to 12.4 are still
playable for Operations points as per rule 7.5.



GAME NAME:
Gaia Projects

In Gaia Project, each
player controls one
of 14 factions striving
to peacefully colonize
the Terra Mystica
galaxy. Each faction has
different environmental
needs to survive on a planet.
These needs have led the factions
to master terraforming, enabling
them to make different planet types habitable
for themselves.
During the game, you will colonize new planets,
upgrade mines into
better structures,
and unite planets to
form federations. The
choice is yours: will
you expand near other
factions, which might give
you power and trade partners,
or will you look for solitude,
where you can expand more freely?
In addition, you will need to research and
discover new technologies to improve your skills.
In the end, only the best developed faction will win.

TABLE OF CONTENTS:
Components 2
Game Setup 4
Goal and Gameplay 8
The Power Cycle 9
The 6 Rounds of Play 10
I. Income 10
II. Gaia 10
III. Actions 10
1) Build a Mine 11
2) Start a Gaia Project 12
3) Upgrade Existing Structure 13
4) Form a Federation 14
5) Research Progress 15
6) Power and Q.I.C. Actions 15
7) Special Actions 16
8) Pass 16
9) Free Actions 16
10) Passive Action: Charging Power 17
IV. Clean-Up 17
Game End and Scoring 18
Advanced Setup: Beyond the First Game 19
Appendices 20
I. Factions 20
II. Research Board / III. Action Spaces 22/23
IV. Round Boosters / V. Round Scoring Tiles 23/24
VI. Tech Tiles 24

COMPONENTS:
- 10 Space Sector Tiles Numbered 01 to 10. Tiles 05, 06, and 07 are double-sided.
- 1 Research Board 7 Double-Sided Faction Boards. Each side shows a different faction.
- 1 Scoring Board
- 6 Final Scoring Tiles
- 19 Federation Tokens
- 6 Space Stations
- 10 Round Boosters 36 Standard Tech Tiles
- 4 each:
- 15 Advanced Tech Tiles
- 20 Action Tokens
- 15 Record Tokens
- 12 Gaia Planet Tokens 1 Lost Planet Token
- 10 Round Scoring Tiles
- 1 each:
- 3 each: 1 each:
- 2 each:
- 2 Structures (in each player color) Yellow, orange, brown, white, gray, blue, red
- 8 Mines
- 4 Trading Stations
- 3 Research Labs
- 2 Academies
- 1 Planetary Institute
- 3 Gaiaformers
- 7 Player Tokens
- 25 Satellites

CREDITS:
Gaia Project is a game designed by Helge Ostertag and Jens Drgemller.
Dennis Lohausen is responsible for the illustrations and graphic design. The
rulebook was written by Bastian Winkelhaus and Frank Heeren, who is also
responsible for editing and producing this game.
Many thanks to Inga Keutmann for the English translation, Christine Conrad
for the rules and card layout, Bastian Winkelhaus for many shared playtests,
Johannes Grimm for proofreading the rulebook, and Alexandar Ortloff, Andrea
DellAgnese, and Julia Faeta for editing the English rules. We want to thank
Morten Monrad Pedersen and his Automa Team for the Automa solo game mode,
Panda Games for the support regarding the realization of the game and Barry for
providing the test forum. The Automa team wishes to thank James Ataei-Kachuei
for proofreading the solo rules.
 2017 Feuerland Verlagsgesellschaft mbH Wilhelm-Reuter-Str. 37 65817 Eppstein-Bremthal.
Fantasy Flight Supply is a TM of Fantasy Flight Games. Z-Man Games, and the Z-Man logo
are TM of Z-Man Games. Z-Man Games, 1995 West County Road B2, Roseville, Minnesota,
55113, USA, 651-639-1905. Actual components may vary from those shown. Made in China.
THIS PRODUCT IS NOT A TOY. NOT INTENDED FOR USE BY PERSONS 13 YEARS OF
AGE OR YOUNGER.
17 Decision Cards
4 Player Aids
1 Terraforming
Reference Card
1 Turn Order Card
Automa Cards:
7 Faction Cards
TIEBREAKER 3a:
Transdim Planet
Ongoing Ability:
TerranS
Ongoing Ability:
After colonizing
a new planet type,
the Automa gains an
additional 2 VP.
GeodenS
If the Automa
cannot upgrade,
it colonizes
with range 3.
Ongoing Ability:
After upgrading
to a trading station,
the Automa gains
an additional 3 VP.
Hadsch
HallaS
Ongoing Ability:
When taking a power/Q.I.C. action
(except as part of a faction action),
the Automa resolves the effect twice
using the same support card.
Xenos
Use the same support card for
both power/Q.I.C. actions.
ItarS
Ongoing Ability:
TIEBREAKER 3a:
Shortest distance to
one of your planets.
Taklons
Ongoing Ability:
When upgrading, the Automa
can downgrade from a research
lab to a trading station. This has
priority over normal upgrades
to trading stations.
Ongoing Ability:
After upgrading to a
research lab, the Automa
advances in a random
research area.
Firaks
1 First Player 14 Credit Marker
Markers
7 Ore
Markers
7 Knowledge
Markers
30 Q.I.C.
(Quantum
Intelligence Cubes)
50 Power
Tokens 1 Brainstone
Other Player Pieces (in each player color)
Yellow, orange, brown, white, gray, blue, red
1 Automa Rulebook 1 Automa Player Aid
For your first game, play with the following game board setup and factions. For future games,
also use the Advanced Setup on page 18, which features a variable game board and all factions.
For a solo game, also see the Automa rulebook. With two or more
players, return the Automa cards and Automa player aid to the box.
Determine a first player using the method of your choice. That player takes the first player marker.
Game Board
Setup for 3 and 4 players
Assemble the game board by taking all 10 sector tiles and
placing them as shown below. Make sure that sector tiles 05, 06,
and 07 are solid-side up.
Setup for 1 and 2 players
Assemble the game board by taking sector tiles 01 to 07 and
placing them as shown below. Make sure that sector tiles 05, 06,
and 07 are outlined-side up. Return the unused sector tiles to the
box.
Research Board and Federation Tokens
Place the research board next to the game board.
Take the nine standard tech tiles with green marks on
the back and randomly place each of them faceup on a
different tech space of the research board. Then stack the
remaining standard tech tiles on the placed tiles of the
same type; this will give you nine piles of four identical tech tiles.
Randomly place one advanced tech tile faceup on each space
between level 4 and 5 of the six research areas. Return the
unused advanced tech tiles to the box.
Set aside the federation token shown to the
right; this is the Gleens factions federation
token. Randomly take one federation token
from those remaining and place it on level 5
of the Terraforming research area.
Sort and stack the remaining federation
tokens by type and place these six piles
next to the game board with their green
sides faceup.
Exception: The 12 VP federation tokens
have two gray sides.

GAME SETUP:
Use the small groups of blue stars on sector tiles 01 to 04 to help you place them correctly.
Solid side Outlined side
(Double-sided)
Scoring Board
Place the scoring board next to the game board.
Randomly place one round scoring tile faceup on each
numbered tile space of the scoring board. Return the unused
round scoring tiles to the box.
Randomly place one final scoring tile faceup on each tile space
to the right of the green ranking tracks. Return the unused final
scoring tiles to the box.
Round Boosters and General Supply
Randomly select as many round boosters as there are players
in the game plus three (e.g., seven round boosters in a 4-player
game) and place them next to the game board. Return the unused
round boosters to the box.
Place all action tokens, Gaia Planet tokens, the Lost Planet
token, power tokens, Q.I.C., and record tokens near the game
board as a general supply.
7 round boosters for a 4player game.
1 Federation Token
(chosen randomly)
6 Advanced Tech
Tiles (chosen and
placed randomly)
9 x 4 Standard Tech
Tiles (placed randomly)
Terraforming
Navigation
Artificial Intelligence
Gaia Project
Economy
Science
6 Round Scoring Tiles
2 Final Scoring Tiles
Choosing a Faction
The First Game
For your first game, choose one of the following factions:
1 player: Hadsch Hallas (Human), Taklons (Automa)
2 players: Hadsch Hallas, Xenos
3 players: Terrans, Taklons, Geodens
4 players: Terrans, Hadsch Hallas, Xenos, Taklons
The first player chooses one of the above factions and takes the
matching faction board. Continuing in clockwise order, each
other player chooses one of the remaining factions. Place your
faction board in front of you with the chosen faction faceup.
The factions abilities are explained in detail on page 20.
Take all structures and Gaiaformers of your color. Place the
structures on their corresponding spaces of your faction board.
Place your three Gaiaformers near your faction board.
Take one ore, one knowledge, and two credit markers and
place them on the starting positions of your resource track.
Return the unused ore, knowledge, and credit markers to the box.
If your faction board shows at least one Q.I.C. below
your name, take that many Q.I.C. from the supply
and place them on your faction board.
For each area of the power cycle on your faction board, take
from the supply the number of power tokens shown and place
them in that area.
Take six player tokens of your color and place one of them on
level 0 of each research area on the research board.
If your faction board shows level 1 of a research area, advance
your token one level in the corresponding area. If that level
shows a resource marked by a star and a white outline, gain that
resource immediately as a one-time bonus:
To gain ore, move the ore token that many spaces to the
right on your resource track.
To gain a Q.I.C., take a Q.I.C. token from the supply and
place it on your faction board.
To gain a Gaiaformer, take one of your set-aside
Gaiaformers and place it on your faction board.
Note: The level 1 bonuses of the
Economy and Science research
areas are income bonuses and are
not gained during setup.
Take the seventh player token of your
color and place it on space 10 (10
VP) of the VP track as a VP marker.
Take all satellites of your color; place one on
each 0 space on the scoring board and the
rest near your faction board.
Take one player aid and place it faceup near your faction board.
If you are playing the Taklons, take the brainstone and
place it in area I of your power cycle.
If you are playing the Gleens, take the Gleens federation token
and place it near your faction board.
If you are playing the Ivits, take the six space stations
and place them near your faction board.
The Terrans start with 3 knowledge, 4 ore, and 15 credits.
The Terrans place 4 power tokens in
area I and 4 power tokens in area II.
terranS
The Taklons start on level 0 in each research area.
The Terrans faction board shows level 1
of the Gaia Project research area; they
advance 1 level and gain 1 Gaiaformer.
terranS
The Terrans structures and Gaiaformers.
Placing Your First Structures
The First Game
For your first game, place your mines as shown below. Always
take your mines from left to right on your faction board.
By placing your first structures, you colonize your first planets,
and you reveal spaces on your faction board. This is important
for your income, which is explained on page 10.
Choosing Your First Round Booster
Starting with the last player and continuing in counterclockwise
order, choose an available round booster and place it faceup in
front of you. Unchosen round boosters will remain next to the
board and be available for the first round.
Neutral Player (12 Players)
When playing with 1 or 2 players, a neutral player is added to
affect final scoring. Take two satellites of an unused color and
place one on each ranking track next to the final scoring tiles;
the number on each final scoring tile determines the satellites
position on that ranking track. During final scoring, these
satellites count as a neutral player at the appropriate rank. Return
all unused satellites to the box.
Return Player Components
Return all unused faction boards, structures, Gaiaformers,
player tokens, satellites, ore markers, knowledge markers, credit
markers, player aids, the brainstone, the Gleens federation
token, and space stations to the box.
Return the turn order card to the box; it is used only when
playing with variable turn order. Variable turn order is an
advanced rule that is explained on page 19.
In a 2-player game, a neutral satellite
is placed on space 8 of the ranking
track next to this tile.
1 player 2 players
3 players 4 players
At the end of the game, the player with the most VP wins.
You will gain VP during the game as well as at the end of
the game. Track your VP using your marker on the VP track. The
various ways to gain VP are detailed below.
Six round scoring tiles are placed on the scoring board during
setup, one for each round. Each round, you gain VP when you
take the action shown on the tile.
The round scoring tiles are explained in Appendix V on page 24.
The numbers in the upper part of a tile (to the left and right
of the green circle) are needed only for the Automa game and are
explained in the Automa rulebook.
Two final scoring tiles are placed on the scoring board during
setup. At the end of the game, players gain VP depending on how
well players fulfilled those conditions.
Next to the final scoring tiles are two ranking tracks; during the
game, use the satellites on them to track players progress on
the scoring conditions of the final scoring tiles. At the end of the
game, the highest ranked player gains the most VP, and other
players gain fewer VP according to their ranking.
The final scoring tiles are explained on page 18.
By uniting planets to form federations during the game,
you gain federation tokens which can award you VP and
additional resources.
At the end of the game, for each level 3, 4, and 5 you have
reached or passed in different research areas of the research
board, you gain 4 VP (e.g., reaching level 5 in Navigation
would award you 4+4+4=12 VP). Each level you reach on the
research board also grants you different rewards during the game
Both types of tech tiles (standard and advanced) can award you
VP as well as allow you to advance in a research area.

GOAL AND GAMEPLAY:
These icons on the research board serve as a
reminder of the points gained for research
areas at the end of the game.
When a player gains this federation token, that
player immediately gains 6 VP and 2 knowledge.
This standard tech tile gains you 3 VP
each time you colonize a Gaia Planet.
This final scoring tile rewards colonizing
as many Gaia Planets as possible. Each
time a player colonizes a Gaia Planet,
move her satellite one space higher on
the track.
Each time you advance in any research
area during this tiles round, gain 2 VP.
During the game, power will cycle through three numbered,
connected power areas on your faction board. Charging power
will allow you to move power tokens toward area III, and
spending power in area III will move it to area I.
To the left of the three power areas on your faction board is the
green Gaia area, which interacts with your power cycle and is
explained on page 10.
Charging Power
You will need to charge power before you can
spend it. Effects that allow you to charge power are
represented by an icon like the one to the right.
For each power you need to charge, do the
following:
1. If there is at least one power token in area I, move a power
token from area I to area II.
2. If area I is empty, move a power token from area II to area III.
3. If areas I and II are empty, you cannot charge the power.
Spending Power
Some actions require you to spend power. You can spend only
power tokens that are in area III. To spend power, move it from
area III to area I.
Gaining and Discarding Power
The total number of power tokens in your power cycle can
change over the course of the game as effects allow you to gain
or discard power.
To gain power, take power tokens from the
supply and place them in area I. Effects that
allow you to gain power are represented by
icons like the one to the right.
To discard power, take the power token from your faction board
and return it to the supply. Unless specified, you can discard
power tokens from any combination of areas except the Gaia area.
Charge 4
Power Icon

THE POWER CYCLE:
An effect allows you to charge 4 power. To do so,
you first move a power token from area I to area II.
Since area I is now empty, you move 2 power tokens
from area II to area III. Now areas I and II are
both empty, so you cannot charge any more power.
The Hadsch Hallas power cycle after setup.
Gain 1 Power
Icon
An action requires you to spend 2 power, so you
move 2 power tokens from area III to area I.
An effect allows you to gain 1 power. To do so, you take
1 power token from the supply and place it in area I.
Then you discard 2 power for another effect by
taking 2 power tokens from among your power
areas and returning them to the supply.
The game will last a total of six rounds. During each round, the
players will progress through four phases in the following order:
Phase I: Income
Phase II: Gaia
Phase III: Actions
Phase IV: Clean-Up
Phase I: Income
At the beginning of each round (including the first),
income allows each player to gain resources. Income
is represented by the icon to the right.
Your faction board, your round booster, your tech tiles, and your
current level in each research area on the research board can all
allow you to gain income.
Track your ore, knowledge, and credits using the corresponding
tokens on the resource track of your faction board (as you gain
or lose a resource, move the token to the number you have
remaining). The track ends at 15, so you cannot have more than
15 ore, 15 knowledge, and 30 credits (15 per token).
You choose the order in which you charge and gain power.
When you gain income from a source (a single income icon), you
must take it all at once before taking the income from another
source.
Phase II: Gaia
If you have power tokens in the Gaia area on your
faction board, move them to area I of your power
cycle (in the direction of the arrow).
Exception: The Terrans move the power tokens directly to
area II instead of area I of the power cycle (as shown by the
arrow on their faction board).
If you have a Gaiaformer on a Transdim Planet, place a Gaia
Planet token on that planet. From now on, that planet counts
as a Gaia Planet. The Gaiaformer remains on the Gaia Planet
until you build a mine on that planet. Further details about Gaia
projects are found on page 12.
Phase III: Actions
Starting with the first player and continuing in clockwise order,
players take turns taking a single action. This continues until all
players have taken the Pass action. As soon as a player has
passed, that player does not take any more turns for the rest of the
phase. The phase ends when all players have passed.
Except for passing, most other
actions can be taken multiple times
during the same phase (but only one
action per player turn). You will
choose the Pass action exactly
once during the round, thereby
ending your participation in the
round.
During your turn, you can take
free actions immediately before or
after your action. Free actions are
explained on page 16.
During other players turns, you can
charge power when your opponents
take actions that trigger your
passive action: charge power. This is
explained on page 17.

THE 6 ROUNDS OF PLAY:
You can choose to charge 4 power
first and then place a new power
token in area I, or vice versa.
The player aid card
shows the actions
you can take.
During the Gaia phase,
a purple Transdim Planet
with a Gaiaformer transforms
into a green Gaia Planet.
1 ore
Gain 2 power
2 knowledge
3 ore
1 ore Charge 1 power
The Hadsch Hallas gain
1 ore and 1 knowledge.
10
1) Build a Mine
You can build a mine on a planet, thereby colonizing that planet.
To build a mine, you must spend two credits and
one ore (this cost is shown to the left of the mines
on your faction board). You must have at least one
mine on your faction board in order to build a mine.
You can build a mine only on a planet that meets these conditions:
It is empty (i.e., has no structures on it).
It is accessible from one of your planets.
It is habitable to your faction. If the planet is not habitable,
you must pay any costs required to make it habitable.
If these conditions are met and you have paid all necessary costs,
take the leftmost mine structure from your faction board and
place it on the planet.
You must complete this action in its entirety, and you can take
it only if you pay all of the necessary costs immediately. You
cannot take only part of the action, like terraforming the planet
partially, or terraforming the planet but not building a mine.
There are special rules for building a mine on a Gaia Planet with
a Gaiaformer on it. These are explained at the end of this section.
Accessibility:
A planets accessibility is determined by your progress in the
Navigation research area. When your token is on level 0 or 1,
your basic range is one. This means that you can build a mine
only on a planet that is one space away from (directly adjacent
to) a planet you have
colonized. At levels 2
and 3, your basic range is
two, at level 4 your basic
range is three, and at
level 5 your basic range
is four.
To determine the needed range, choose the shortest path from one
of your planets to the intended planet. The path can cross planets,
whether or not they are colonized.
Range always defines your maximum range; you can colonize
planets that are closer than your maximum range.
Additionally, when
choosing a planet to
build a mine on, you can
spend any number of
Q.I.C. to increase your
range by two spaces for
each Q.I.C. spent.
Habitability:
Gaia Project includes ten different planet types. Only one type
the respective type of each factions home planetis habitable to
that faction. The color of your faction board corresponds to the
color and type of your home planet.
To build a mine on a planet other than your home planet type,
you must follow these rules:
Transdim Planets cannot be built on.
However, you can transform a Transdim
Planet into a Gaia Planet using a Gaia
Project. Starting a Gaia Project is explained
on page 12.
Gaia Planets can be made habitable by
paying one Q.I.C. Your home planet type has
no impact on this cost.
After transforming a Transdim planet into a Gaia planet, the
Gaiaformer will remain on that planet. The following rules apply
to Gaia Planets with a Gaiaformer on them:
Only the faction
that owns the
Gaiaformer can
colonize that
planet.
The planet is considered accessible to that faction.
You do not need to pay the Q.I.C. cost to make the planet
habitable.
After building a mine on the planet, return the Gaiaformer to
your faction board.
A reminder of this use for
Q.I.C. is shown on your
faction board.
The cost to make a Gaia Planet habitable
is shown on your faction board.
Having reached level
2 of the Navigation
research area, the
Ivits have a basic
range of 2.
The Ivits (red)
are at level 2 in
Navigation and they
spend 1 Q.I.C., giving
them a range of 4: just
enough to reach the
brown planet.
Only the Itars can
build a mine on this
Gaia Planet.
The Terrans build a mine
on a Gaia Planet with one
of their Gaiaformers on it.
They pay 1 ore and 2 credits
for the structure and return
the Gaiaformer to their
faction board.
terranS
The seven colored planet types must first be terraformed.
Depending on how similar the habitat conditions of the
planet are to your home planet, this process can take one,
two, or three terraforming steps. Your faction board shows
the required number of terraforming steps to make each
planet type habitable to your faction.
You must spend a specific amount of ore for each terraforming
step. The ore cost is determined by your progress in the
Terraforming research area. When your token is on levels 0 or
1, each terraforming step costs you three ore. At level 2 the cost
is two ore per step, and at levels 3 and beyond the cost is one ore
per step.
Some power actions and special actions provide free
terraforming steps. When taking these actions, do not pay the
cost of those terraforming steps. These actions are explained on
pages 15 and 16. If those steps are not enough to make a planet
habitable, you can spend ore to perform additional steps.
The Lost Planet is the last planet type, and is only
discovered by reaching level 5 of the Navigation research
area. The Lost Planet is explained on page 22.
2) Start a Gaia Project
As described in the previous action, you cannot build directly
on Transdim Planets: you must first transform them into
Gaia Planets using a Gaia project. Gaia projects are completed
during the Gaia phase of the following round, after which you
will be able to build a mine on that Planet.
To start a Gaia project you must:
Have an available Gaiaformer.
Have access to a Transdim Planet without a Gaiaformer on it.
Spend the necessary power.
Once you have done so, take one of your available Gaiaformers
and place it on the Transdim Planet.
Availability:
A Gaiaformer that is on one of the three
spaces of your faction board is available
to you. You gain your first Gaiaformer
when you reach level 1 in the Gaia Project research area; take
one of the Gaiaformers you set aside during setup and place it
on one of the spaces on your faction board. You gain a second
Gaiaformer when you reach level 3, and a third when you reach
level 4.
A Gaiaformer will stay on the transformed planet after the Gaia
project finishes. You cannot use Gaiaformer to start a new Gaia
Project until you build a mine on its planet to return it to your
faction board.
Accessibility:
The accessibility of a Transdim Planet follows the same rules
as the Build a Mine action. A planet with a Gaiaformer does
not count as colonized by the faction owning that Gaiaformer;
therefore, that planet cannot be used as a starting point to
access another planet (Transdim or otherwise).
Cost:
To start a Gaia project, you must move a total amount of
power from areas I, II, or III to your Gaia area; the amount is
determined by your progress in the Gaia Project research area.
When your token is at level 1 or 2, the cost is six power per
Gaia Project. At level 3, the cost is four power, and at level 4 or
5, this cost is three power. The cost is the same for all of your
Gaiaformers, regardless of when you gained them.
Since Gaia Projects are completed in the following round,
any Gaia projects you begin in the final round will never be
completed.
The Geodens take a special action
that provides 1 free terraforming
step, however they need to take
2 terraforming steps to make the
brown planet habitable. Since they
are at level 3 in Terraforming,
the Geodens pay 1 ore to take the
second step.
The Terrans have gained 2 Gaiaformers. To
start a Gaia Project, they must move 4 total
power tokens from areas I, II, or III to their
Gaia area.
The Geodens are at level 3 in Terraforming,
so they must pay only 1 ore for each
terraforming step.
The Terrans need 2
terraforming steps to
make a black or orange
planet habitable. 3 terraforming
steps
2 terraforming
steps
1 terraforming
step
3) Upgrade Existing Structures
You can upgrade your structures (including your starting mines)
one step at a time to gain new resources and other advantages.
Only mines can be placed directly on empty planets; all other
structures are upgrades that replace another structure on the game
board. The connections between different types of structures on
your faction board are a reminder of how different structures can
be upgraded.
Every upgrade follows these rules:
When you upgrade a structure, remove the original structure
from the board and place it in the appropriate row of your
faction board from right to left.
Like mines, trading stations and research labs are taken from
left to right from your faction board.
To upgrade a structure, you must spend ore and credits. The
cost to upgrade to a structure is shown on the left side of the
corresponding structure row on your faction board.
You can do one of the following four upgrades each time you
take this action:
Mine  Trading Station
Upgrading a mine into a trading station costs
six credits and two ore. If there is at least one
opponents structure in the neighboring area of
your mine, this cost is reduced to three credits and two ore. The
neighboring area of a mine consists of all spaces within a range
of two spaces.
Trading Station -> Planetary Institute
Upgrading a trading station into a planetary institute
costs six credits and four ore. As soon as you upgrade
to your planetary institute, your faction gains a special
ability or action space that is unique to your faction. The various
planetary institutes are explained in appendix I on page 20.
Trading Station -> Research Lab
Upgrading a trading station into a research lab costs
five credits and three ore. When you upgrade to a
research lab, you immediately gain one tech tile (see right
column).
Research Lab -> Academy
Upgrading a research lab into an academy costs
six credits and six ore. As you upgrade, decide which
of the academies on your faction board to upgrade
to. One academy grants you an income of two knowledge each
round, and the other academy gives you an action to gain one
Q.I.C. When you upgrade to an academy, you immediately gain
one tech tile (see right column).
Gaining a Tech Tile
Tech tiles grant you various benefits, such as immediate
resources or income. Keep your tech tiles near your faction
board. Whenever you gain a tech tile, you may advance in a
research area on the research board. Advancing in a research area
is explained on page 15. The following rules apply to gaining a
tech tile:
You can take any standard tech tile, except one you already
own. No faction can own more than one of the same tech
tile, even if it is covered by an advanced tech tile.
If you take one of the six
tech tiles directly below
a research area, you
can advance only in the
research area above it. If
you cannot advance any
further in that research
area, you do not advance.
If you take one of the
three tech tiles in the
lower row, you can
advance in the research
area of your choice.
Instead of taking a standard tech tile, you can take an
advanced tech tile. When you take an advanced tech tile, you
may advance in any research area. To take an advanced tech
tile, you must meet these three conditions:
Your player token must be on level 4 or 5 of the research
area from which you wish to take the advanced tech tile.
You must own at least one federation token with its green
side faceup. To take the advanced tech tile, flip one of your
federation tokens to its gray side. Federations are explained on
page 14.
You must have at least one uncovered standard tech tile. When
you gain an advanced tech tile, place it faceup covering one
of your standard tech tiles. A covered tech tile has no effect.
A standard tech tile can hold exactly one advanced tech
tile. You cannot replace an advanced tech tile with another
advanced tech tile.
Advanced tech tiles are not refilled. Only six advanced tech tiles
are available each game.
The different tech tiles are explained in appendix VI on page 24.
The Ivits gain a
standard tech tile
and advance in
the research area
above it.
The Ivits can gain the
advanced tech tile in
theNavigation (center) or
Artificial Intelligence (right)
research area. They flip a
federation token to its gray side
and place the advanced tech
covering their standard tech.
4) Form a Federation
With this action you can form a federation comprising several of
your colonized planets. Forming a federation allows you to gain
a federation token of your choice from the supply. You can form
any number of federation during the game as long as you meet
their requirements.
Power Value:
You can form a federation only with planets you have colonized.
The structures on those planets must have a total power value of
at least seven. Structures have the following power values:
The power value of each structure is also shown under the
structures cost on your faction board.
Connecting Planets:
To form a federation, you must connect the necessary planets.
Planets you have colonized that are directly adjacent to each
other are connected. To connect planets that are not adjacent, you
must immediately build satellites.
To build a satellite, discard one power. Then take one of the
satellites near your faction board and place it in a space adjacent
to either one of your colonized planets or one of your satellites.
Satellites cannot be placed on planets. A space can hold up to one
satellite of each player color. You can build as many satellites as
you need to connect the necessary planets. You must connect all
of the necessary planets during a single action.
When you form a federation, take a record token
from the supply and place it on any planet in that
federation as a reminder of the federation. If you
built any satellites when forming the federation,
you do not need to place a record token.
Gaining Federation Tokens:
When you form a federation, gain one federation token of your
choice from the supply, placing it in front of you with its green
side faceup. When you gain a federation token, you immediately
gain everything shown on the token. This will usually include VP
and resources.
Note: There is one type of federation token that awards 12 VP
and nothing else. These tokens are gray on both sides, and are
placed with either side faceup when you gain them..
You can later flip tokens from their green side to their gray side
to gain an advanced tech tile or advance to the highest level
(level 5) of a research area.
Additional Rules:
You choose the planets to form a federation, as long as your
structures have a total power value of at least seven. In other
words, you can choose planets that are farther away, as long
as those planets are needed to have a total power value of at
least seven.
You cannot form a federation by connecting more planets
and satellites than are needed to form it. In other words, if
the federation would be valid with at least one fewer planet
and one fewer satellite, you must change the federation.
Each planet and satellite can be part of only one federation.
When colonizing planets directly adjacent to one of your
federations, these new planets enlarge the existing federation
without any advantage for you. Connecting two federations
by colonizing a connecting planet has no effect.
Summary:
The connected structures must have a total power value of at
least seven.
Connect structures with as few satellites as possible. Build
satellites by discarding power.
Planets and satellites of the newly formed federation cannot
be directly adjacent to planets or satellites from any of your
existing federations.
Mines have a power value of 1.
Trading stations and research labs have
a power value of 2.
Planetary institutes and academies have
a power value of 3.
When you gain this federation token, you gain
6 VP and 2 knowledge. Later, you will be able
to flip it over to gain an advanced tech tile or
advance to level 5 of a research area.
5) Research Progress
Spend four knowledge to advance one level in a research area
of your choice.
If that level shows a resource marked by a star and a white
outline, gain that resource immediately as a one-time bonus.
Any other effect of that level is active immediately, and remains
active as long as you are at that level. The different research
areas and levels are explained in appendix II on page 22.
In order to advance to level 5 of a research area, in addition to
any other costs, you must flip one of your federation tokens from
its green side to its gray side (this is the same cost as for taking
an advanced tech tile).
Only one player can advance to level 5 of each research area.
Each time your research token advances from level 2 to level 3
in any research area, you charge three power (this also applies if
you advanced by taking a tech tile).
At the end of the game, you will gain 4 VP for each level 3, 4,
and 5 you have reached or passed on the research board.
6) Power and Q.I.C. Actions
The lower part of the research board shows octagonal purple
and green action spaces. To take a power action (purple spaces),
spend the indicated amount of power. To take a Q.I.C. action
(green spaces), spend the indicated number of Q.I.C.
After paying the actions cost, resolve the effect shown. The
effects of action spaces are explained in appendix on page 23.
Each power and Q.I.C. action can be taken only once
per round. After you take a power or Q.I.C. action, place
an action token onto the action space to show that the
action cannot be taken again during that round.
The icon between level 2 and level 3 of a
research area is a reminder to charge 3
power when you advance past it.
The red- and bluecircled satellites show
two possibilities to form
a federation with the
planetary institute (power
value 3) and two trading
stations (power value 2).
The red possibility includes a mine, which increases the total
power value to 8; since at least two satellites are needed in
both cases, the red possibility is allowed.
The mine (power value 1) and the connecting blue-circled
satellite are not needed to reach a power value of 7. The redcircled satellite is sufficient to achieve this.
Forming this
federation is not
allowed.
This federation is allowed, but it is relatively inefficient, since
the total power value of the structures is 11. The Xenos may
want to form two separate federations, since each group of 3
connected structures has nearly enough power value to form
a federation on its own.
Spend 4 power
to gain 2 ore.
The Xenos pay 4 knowledge to advance
from level 0 to level 1 in the Terraforming
research area. They immediately gain the onetime bonus of 2 ore.
7) Special Actions
Special action spaces are octagonal orange spaces that can be
used for an immediate effect. Unlike power and Q.I.C. actions,
special actions have no cost and are available only to the player
that owns the component they appear on. Special action spaces
appear on faction boards, tech tiles, and round boosters.
Each special action can be used only once per round. After you
take a special action, place an action token onto that action
space to show that the action cannot be taken again during the
current round.
A special action cannot be combined with another special,
power, or Q.I.C. action.
The special action spaces are described in the appendices based
on the component they appear on.
8) Pass
On your turn, if you cannot or do not want to take any other
actions in the current round, you must pass. After you pass, your
turn ends, and you do not take any more turns for the remainder
of the round.
When you pass, take one of the three available round boosters
(including one that another player returned during this round),
then return the booster you started the round with. You cannot
keep your booster (i.e., you cannot use the same booster two
rounds in a row). In the final round, do not take a new booster
before returning yours.
Place the new round booster
facedown in front of you to
show that you have already
passed. Once all players have
passed, the action phase of the
current round ends.
Some round boosters have effects that trigger when you pass,
indicated by a red icon. These effects trigger during the round
you return that booster. Some Tech tiles also show that icon;
those effects trigger every time you pass. This icon is explained
on page 24.
The first time a player passes during a round, that player
takes the first player marker.
9) Free Actions
In addition to your action, you can also take any number of free
actions during your turn. You can take free actions before or
after your action, but not during. You can take each free action as
many times as you can afford to.
You can take free actions before you pass but not after (passing is
an action).
You cannot take a free action if it is not your turn (e.g., if you
already passed, during a passive action, during a different phase,
etc.).
The free actions are:
Discard one power token from area II of your power cycle to
move one power token from area II to area III. You can do
this even if you have power tokens in area I
Spend 4 power to gain 1 Q.I.C.
Spend 3 power to gain 1 ore.
Spend 1 Q.I.C. to gain 1 ore.
Spend 4 power to gain 1 knowledge.
Spend 1 power to gain 1 credit.
Spend 1 knowledge to gain 1 credit.
Spend 1 ore to gain 1 credit.
Spend 1 ore to gain 1 power (in area I).
The summary on the right side of your faction board shows all
exchange possibilities.
The Ivits can use this special action
once they have upgraded to a planetary
institute.
Only the player with
this round booster
can take this action.
Only the player
with this tech
tile can take this
action
After returning your
round booster, you
take another booster
and place it facedown
in front of you.
As a free action, you can
discard a power token to move
a power token from area II to
area III.
These effects trigger when you pass.
10) Passive Action: Charge Power
Each time a player builds a mine or upgrades a structure, each
other player with at least one structure in the neighboring area
(within a range of 2 spaces) may spend VP to charge power.
To charge power for a structure, spend one fewer VP than the
power you would charge (to charge 1/2/3/4 power you must
spend 0/1/2/3 VP). You may choose not to spend any VP, and
thus not charge any power.
If you own multiple structures in the neighboring area, you can
charge power only for your structure with the highest power
value (power value is explained on page 14). If you own multiple
structures with the same power value, only charge power for one
of them.
You cannot spend fewer VP to charge less than the full amount of
power. You must either charge all of the power or none of it, with
two exceptions:
If you cannot charge all of the power because it is more than
you would need to move all of the tokens in your power cycle
to area III, you charge only as much as you can by spending
the corresponding number of VP.
If you cannot spend the necessary VP because you do not
have enough, you spend as many as you have and charge the
corresponding amount of power.
Additional Rules:
The player who builds or upgrades must point out which
opponent(s) can charge power.
In clockwise order from the player who built or upgraded,
players decide if they want to charge power.
An opponent that has passed can still charge power.
You must spend VP only for power you charge this way. You
do not have to spend VP for any other power you charge.
Phase IV: Clean-Up
The Clean-Up phase prepares you for the next round. At the end
of round 6, skip this phase and proceed to scoring.
Remove all action tokens from all power, Q.I.C., and special
action spaces and return them to the supply.
Flip all round boosters faceup.
Remove this rounds round scoring tile from the scoring board
and return it to the box.
After this phase ends, the next round begins.
The Itars can charge only
1 power, even though the
planetary institute would
allow them to charge 3.
They spend 0 VP to charge 1
power.
The Ivits (red) build
a mine, so the Xenos
(yellow) and Itars
(white) can spend VP to
charge power. The Xenos
spend 0 VP to charge
1 power for their mine.
The Itars planetary
institute has their
highest power value, so
they can spend 2 VP to
charge 3 power.
The Ivits can afford to spend
only 1 VP. Even if their
structure would normally allow
them to spend 2 VP to charge 3 power, they may choose to
spend the 1 VP they have to charge 2 power.

GAME END AND SCORING:
The game ends after round 6s action phase. It is followed by a final scoring.
Final Scoring Tiles
For each final scoring tile on the scoring board, players gain VP based
on progress on the corresponding ranking track:
The highest-ranked player gains 18 VP.
The second-highest gains 12 VP.
The third-highest gains 6 VP.
The fourth-highest gains 0 VP.
In case of a tie, for each tied player, add the VP for the highest
remaining rank. Divide the total points evenly among those
players.
Example: Two players share the highest rank: they add the VP
for the highest and second-highest ranks together and divide
them evenly (18+12=30 VP; each of them gains 15 VP).
Remember to take into account the neutral satellites in a solo or
2-player game, as explained on page 7.
Research Scoring
For each level 3, 4, and 5 you have reached or passed
on the research board, gain 4 VP (e.g., at level 5 in
Navigation, you gain 4+4+4=12 VP).
Resource Scoring
Gain 1 VP for every 3 credits, knowledge, or ore you
have (in any combination).
Winner
The player with the most VP wins the game. In case of a tie, the tied players share the victory.
Owns the most structures that are part of
federations (the Lost Planets mine counts
as a structure).
Owns the most structures (the Lost
Planets mine counts as a structure).
Colonized the most different planet
types (including Gaia Planets and the
Lost Planet).
The six final scoring tiles are:
Colonized the most Gaia Planets.
Colonized in the most space sector tiles
(at least 1 structure per sector, including
the Lost Planet).
Built the most satellites.
(The Ivits space stations count as satellites.)
Reminder for VP in each research area at the
end of the game.
Reminder for VP for resources remaining at
the end of the game.

ADVANCED SETUP: BEYOND THE FIRST GAME:
When you are familiar with the basic rules, you can play with a more variable game setup.
Choosing Your Faction
Instead of choosing a faction from the list, the first player
chooses any one of the seven faction boards, then chooses either
of the factions on it and places the board on the table with that
side faceup. Continuing in clockwise order, each other player
does the same with the remaining faction boards.
Placing Your First Structures
Instead of placing your starting mines according to the diagram,
follow these rules:
Starting with the first player and continuing in clockwise order,
place one mine on any one home planet (matching your color) of
your choice. Then, starting with the last player and continuing in
counterclockwise order, place your second mine on a different
home planet.
Players do not charge power for mines their opponents place
during setup. Remember to always take the leftmost mine on
your faction board when placing a mine.
The Xenos place their third mine after all players have placed
their second mine. The Ivits place their planetary institute
last, after all mines have been placed (including the Xenos
third mine).
Variable Turn Order
Instead of using clockwise turn order for the game, you can use
the turn order card for variable turn order:
During setup, place the turn order card next to
the game board. Starting with the first player and
continuing in clockwise order, each player places a
satellite on the topmost available space on the left
side of the turn order card. During the game, when
you pass, move your satellite to the topmost available
space on the other side of the turn order card (each round will
alternate between the left side and the right side). The numbers on
the card indicate the turn order during the rounds.
Variable Game Board
The 10 space sector tiles allow for many board configurations.
Do not assemble the board as normal. Instead, after players have
chosen their factions, the last player in turn order assembles the
game board. Alternatively, players can agree to assemble the
game board together.
You can use the following methods to assemble the board. Note
that two planets of the same type can never by directly adjacent:
3 or 4 Players
Use all 10 space sector tiles and place sectors 05, 06,
and 07 solid-side up.
Method 1: Place space sector tiles 01 through 04 as described
in the basic setup, then randomly place tiles 05 through 10 to
create the same board shape as the basic setup. Rotate each
tile as you choose.
Method 2: Randomly place space sector tiles 01 through 04 in
the same orientation as in the basic setup, then randomly place
tiles 05 through 10 to create the same board shape as the basic
setup. Rotate each tile as you choose.
Method 3: Randomly place all of the space sector tiles to
create the same board shape as the basic setup. Rotate each
tile as you choose.
1 or 2 Players
Use sector tiles 01 through 07 and place sectors 05,
06, and 07 outlined-side up.
Randomly place all of the space sector tiles to create the same
board shape as the basic setup. Rotate each tile as you choose.
Even More Possibilities
Once you are very familiar with the game, try creating new
shapes for the board. In a 3-player game, you can play without
sectors 09 and 10 to reduce the size of the game board.
By placing your first mines you reveal spaces on your faction
board. This is important for your income (see Phase I: Income on page 10).

APPENDICES:
Appendix I: Factions
Terrans Planet Type: Terra
Ability: During the Gaia phase, move the power tokens in your
Gaia area to area II of your power cycle instead of to area I.
Planetary Institute: During the Gaia phase, when you move
power tokens from your Gaia area to area II of your power cycle,
you may gain resources as if you were spending that much power
to take free actions.
Example: During the Gaia phase, you move four power from
the Gaia area to area II, allowing you to gain one ore and
one credit.
Lantids Planet Type: Terra
Ability: When you take the Build a Mine action, you may
build a mine on a planet colonized by an opponent (including the
Lost Planet). Place your mine next to the opponents structure.
You do not have to pay for terraforming, but you must still pay
the mines cost. This mine counts as a normal mine in all ways
except the following: this mine cannot be upgraded, and it does
not count for any effects that relate to how many planet types or
Gaia planets you have colonized.
Planetary Institute: Each time you build a mine on a planet
colonized by an opponent, gain two knowledge.
Xenos Planet Type: Desert
Ability: You place a third starting mine after all other starting
mines have been placed.
Planetary Institute: You can form federations with a total
power value of six instead of seven. You gain one Q.I.C. as
income instead of one power token.
Gleens Planet Type: Desert
Ability: If you would ever gain Q.I.C., gain that much ore
instead; once you have upgraded to the indicated academy, this
effect no longer applies. To make a Gaia Planet habitable, pay
one ore instead of one Q.I.C. Each time you build a mine on a
Gaia Planet, gain two additional VP.
Planetary Institute: When you upgrade
to the planetary institute, immediately gain
the Gleens federation token (gaining the
resources shown as normal). Gaining this
tile counts as forming a federation. The
planetary institute itself can still be part of
a federation on the board.
Taklons Planet Type: Swamp
Ability: The Brainstone counts as one power token
(when starting a Gaia Project, building satellites, etc.),
but you can spend it as if it were three power.
Planetary Institute: Each time you would charge power from
Passive Action: Charge Power, you gain one power token. You
can choose to gain the power before or after charging.
Ambas Planet Type: Swamp
Ability: -
Planetary Institute: Once per round, as an action, you can
swap your planetary institute with one of your mines on the
game board (this can help you form a new federation). This has
no impact on existing federations, even if their power value
becomes less than seven. The swap does not count as a build or
upgrade action; no VP or power can be gained from it.
Hadsch Hallas Planet Type: Oxide
Ability: -
Planetary Institute: You can spend credits instead of power to
take free actions that allow you to gain resources.
Example: You can spend 3 credits to take the free action that
allows you to gain one ore.
Ivits Planet Type: Oxide
Ability: During setup, do not place mines. Instead, after all other
players have placed mines (including the Xenos third mine),
place your planetary institute on any red planet.
You can have only one federation during the whole game, but
unlike other factions, you will be able to grow that federation to
gain new federation tokens. After you have formed a federation,
to take the Form a Federation action again, you must connect
planets to that federation instead of forming a new federation. The
power values of the structures on those planets must bring the total
power value of that federation to at least to 7X, where X is the
number of federation tokens you own plus one (not including the
federation token from level 5 of Terraforming). All other rules
for forming a federation apply, including building satellites and
gaining federation tokens. To build a satellite during this action,
you must spend one Q.I.C. instead of discarding one power.
Planetary Institute: As a special action, place a space station
on an accessible space that does not contain a planet or another
space station. The accessibility of a space follows the same rules
as the Build a Mine action. Like planets, a space station can
be connected with satellites; each space station counts as having
a power value of one for its federation. A space station is not
a structure, so placing one does not allow opponents to charge
power. A space station does not count as a colonized planet,
but it can be used as a starting point when determining the
accessibility of a planet (i.e., range can be counted from a space
station). Your opponents can place satellites in a space containing
a space station.
Gleens
federation
token.
Geodens Planet Type: Volcanic
Ability: -
Planetary Institute: The first time you build a mine on each
planet type, gain 3 knowledge. (You do not gain knowledge for
planet types you colonized before upgrading to your planetary
institute.)
Bal Taks Planet Type: Volcanic
Ability: You cannot advance in the Navigation research area,
even if you take the tech tile below the Navigation research area.
If you do take that tech tile, no advancement occurs.
As a free action, you can move a Gaiaformer from a Gaiaformer
space on your faction board to your Gaia area to gain one Q.I.C.
Gaiaformers in your Gaia area are not available until the next Gaia
phase. In the next Gaia phase, move any Gaiaformer in your Gaia
area back to its Gaiaformer space.
Planetary Institute: You can now advance in the Navigation
research area.
Firaks Planet Type: Titanium
Ability: -
Planetary Institute: As an action, you can downgrade a
research lab into a trading station and immediately advance one
level in a research area of your choice. Advancing in a research
area is explained on page 15. This counts as an Upgrade to a
Trading Station action. You can later upgrade the trading station
back into a research lab using the normal rules (including gaining
a new tech tile).
Bescods Planet Type: Titanium
Ability: The positions of your planetary institute and academies
are swapped on your faction board, as is the income you gain
for trading stations and research labs. As with the other factions,
upgrading to an academy or a research lab allows you to gain a
tech tile.
Once per round, as an action, you can advance your lowest-level
token in a research area (without paying knowledge). If multiple
of your tokens are tied for the lowest level, choose which of
the tied tokens to advance. To advance to level 5 this way, you
must still flip a federation token as normal. Remember, only one
player can reach level 5 of each research area.
Planetary Institute: The power value of your structures on gray
planets (your home type) is increased by one (in addition to any
other effects that increase their power value).
Nevlas Planet Type: Ice
Ability: As a free action, you can move one power token from
area III of your power cycle to your Gaia area to gain one
knowledge (these power tokens follow the normal Gaia phase
rules). This does not count as spending power.
Planetary Institute: You can spend power tokens in area III of
your power cycle as if they were each two power. Otherwise,
they count as one power token (when starting a Gaia Project,
building satellites, etc.). When paying for a power action with an
odd power cost (1, 3, 5, etc.), the unspent power is lost.
Itars Planet Type: Ice
Ability: Each time you discard a power token from area II of
your power cycle to move another power token to area III, place
the discarded power token in your Gaia area instead of returning
it to the supply.
Planetary Institute: During the Gaia phase, you can discard
4 power tokens from your Gaia area to immediately gain a tech
tile (standard or advanced). The rules for Gaining a Tech Tile are
explained on page 13. You may do this as many times as you can
afford to.
Appendix II: Research Board
From left the right, the research board includes the following research areas:
Terraforming, Navigation, Artificial Intelligence, Gaia Project, Economy, Science.
The different levels grant you the effects described below. Only the level your player token is on counts;
Previous levels do not have any effect. Bonuses identified by a star and a white outline are one-time bonuses.
Terraforming
Level 0: Each terraforming step costs you three ore.
Level 1: Each terraforming step costs you three ore.
Immediately gain two ore.
Level 2: Each terraforming step costs you two ore.
Level 3: Each terraforming step costs you one ore.
Level 4: Each terraforming step costs you one ore. Immediately
gain two ore.
Level 5: Each terraforming step costs you one ore. Immediately
gain the federation token placed here. Gaining this
federation token counts as Forming an Federation.
Remember that you must have a previously acquired
federation token in order to advance to level 5 of this
research area and claim the federation token there.
Navigation
Level 0: Your basic range is one.
Level 1: Your basic range is one. Immediately gain one Q.I.C.
Level 2: Your basic range is two.
Level 3: Your basic range is two. Immediately gain one Q.I.C.
Level 4: Your basic range is three.
Level 5: Your basic range is four. Immediately place the
Lost Planet token on an accessible space that does
not contain a planet, satellite, or space station. The
accessibility of a space follows the same rules as the
Build a Mine action. This counts as a Build a Mine
action, meaning you can gain VP and your opponents
can gain power. Do not place a mine on the Lost Planet
token. You are considered to have colonized the planet;
place one of your satellites on the Lost Planet token as a
reminder. The Lost Planet counts as its own planet type,
and as a planet with a mine. You cannot upgrade this
mine.
Artificial Intelligence
Level 0: This level has no effect.
Level 1: Immediately gain one Q.I.C.
Level 2: Immediately gain one Q.I.C.
Level 3: Immediately gain two Q.I.C.
Level 4: Immediately gain two Q.I.C.
Level 5: Immediately gain four Q.I.C.
Gaia Project
Level 0: This level has no effect. You cannot start a Gaia Project.
Level 1: To start a Gaia project, you must move six power
tokens to your Gaia area. Immediately gain one of your
Gaiaformers.
Level 2: To start a Gaia project, you must move six power tokens
to your Gaia area. Immediately gain three power tokens.
Level 3: To start a Gaia project, you must move four power
tokens to your Gaia area. Immediately gain one of your
Gaiaformers.
Level 4: To start a Gaia project, you must move three power
tokens to your Gaia area. Immediately gain one of your
Gaiaformers.
Level 5: To start a Gaia project, you must move three power
tokens to your Gaia area. Immediately gain 4 VP and
1 additional VP for each Gaia Planet with one of your
structures on it (you do not gain VP for Gaiaformers on
Gaia Planets).
Economy
Level 0: This level has no effect.
Level 1: During each income phase, gain two credits and charge
one power.
Level 2: During each income phase, gain one ore, two credits,
and charge two power.
Level 3: During each income phase, gain one ore, three credits,
and charge three power.
Level 4: During each income phase, gain two ore, four credits,
and charge four power.
Level 5: Immediately gain three ore, six credits, and charge six
power. Remember that you no longer receive the income
from level 4.
Science
Level 0: This level has no effect.
Level 1: During each income phase, gain one knowledge.
Level 2: During each income phase, gain two knowledge.
Level 3: During each income phase, gain three knowledge.
Level 4: During each income phase, gain four knowledge.
Level 5: Immediately gain nine knowledge. Remember that you
no longer receive the income from level 4.
Appendix III: Power and Q.I.C. Action Spaces
Action spaces on the research board are available to all players, but each of these actions can be taken only once per round.
To take one of these actions, you must spend the amount of power or Q.I.C. shown above the action.
1 Actions: Gain two or three knowledge, two ore, seven credits,
and two power tokens
When you take this action, immediately gain the resources
shown.
2 Actions: Take one or two free terraforming steps
When you take this action, immediately take a Build a Mine
action. You get the shown number of free terraforming steps
to make a planet habitable. If you take the two-step action, but
need only one step, the second step is lost. You can pay ore for
additional terraforming steps, but you cannot combine this action
with another action.
3 Actions: Gain a tech tile
When you take this action, immediately gain a tech tile of
your choice (standard or advanced), advancing in a research area
as normal (see Gaining a Tech Tile on page 13).
4 Action: Score a federation token again
When you take this action, immediately gain all resources and
VP shown on one of your federation tokens (i.e., you gain the
VP and resources of one of your federation tokens an additional
time). You do not gain a new federation token, and you do not
flip one of your federation tokens back to its green side. This
means that you can neither get another advanced tech tile nor
advance to another level 5 in any research area with the same
federation token. If you do not have a federation token, you
cannot take this action.
5 Action: Gain VP for planet types
When you take this action, immediately gain 3 VP and 1
additional VP for each different planet type you have colonized
(you do not gain VP for Gaiaformers on Gaia or Transdim
Planets). Gaia Planets and the Lost Planet counts as their own
planet types.
Appendix IV: Round Boosters
There are ten different round boosters in the game. Each booster grants you additional income, and some
boosters have additional effects. Round boosters are only in effect while you have that booster.
1 During the income phase, gain one ore and one knowledge.
2 During the income phase, gain two credits and one Q.I.C.
3 During the income phase, gain two power tokens and one
ore.
4 During the income phase, gain two credits. As a special
action, you may take a Build a Mine action with one
free terraforming step. You can pay ore for additional
terraforming steps, but you cannot combine this action with
another action.
5 During the income phase, charge two power. As a special
action, you can take a Build a Mine action or Start a
Gaia Project with your basic range increased by three. The
normal rules for the actions apply. This action cannot be
combined with another action.
6 During the income phase, gain one ore. When you return
this round booster by taking the Pass action, gain 1 VP for
each of your mines on the board (including the Lost Planet).
7 During the income phase, gain one knowledge. When you
return this round booster by taking the Pass action, gain 3
VP for each of your research labs on the board.
8 During the income phase, gain one ore. When you return
this round booster by taking the Pass action, gain 2 VP for
each of your trading stations on the board.
9 During the income phase, charge four power. When you
return this round booster by taking the Pass action, gain
4 VP for each of your planetary institutes and academies on
the board.
10 During the income phase, gain four credits. When you return
this round booster by taking the Pass action, gain 1 VP for
each Gaia Planet you have colonized (you do not gain VP for
Gaiaformers on Gaia or Transdim Planets).
Appendix V: Round Scoring Tiles
Each round scoring tile on the score board is in effect for one round. The central part of each tile shows
you how to score additional VP during that round. The numbers on a tiles upper part (to the left and right
of the green icon) are needed only in the Automa solo game and are explained in the Automa rulebook.
Appendix VI: Tech Tiles
Most tech tiles allow you to gain resources or VP:
You gain the resources or VP shown:
How frequently you receive the shown resources or income can be tied to one of these conditions:
Examples:
When you take the Pass action, gain 3 VP
per federation token you own.
Each time you advance in a research area,
gain 2 additional VP.
When you gain this tech tile, immediately
gain 1 ore for each sector in which you have
colonized at least one planet.
During each income phase, gain 1 knowledge
and 1 credit.
When you take the Pass action, gain 1 VP
for each planet type you have colonized.
Each time you build a mine on a
Gaia Planet, gain 3 additional VP.
As a special action, gain 1 Q.I.C. and 5
credits.
The power value of your planetary institute
and academies becomes four. If you place
an advanced tech tile on this tile, the power
value returns to three. This does not affect
federations that have already been formed.
Gain 2 additional
VP when you
build a mine.
Gain 3 or 4 additional
VP (depending on
the tile) when you
upgrade to a trading
station.
Gain 5 additional VP
when you upgrade
to an academy or
planetary institute.
Gain 3 or 4 additional
VP (depending on the
tile) when you build a
mine on a Gaia Planet.
Gain 5 additional VP when
you gain a federation token
(no matter how you gain the
federation token).
Gain 2 additional VP for each
terraforming step you take
(no matter how you take the
terraforming steps).
Gain 2 additional VP
when you advance in a
research area.
Ore Credits Knowledge Q.I.C. Power VP
When you pass and return
your round booster.
Immediately when
you take the tech tile.
Each time the
condition is met.
Income received in Phase I. Special action, which you can take once per round.
Per planet type you have
colonized (including
Gaia Planets and the Lost
Planet).
Per federation
token you
own.
Per sector in which you
have colonized one or
more planets (including
the Lost Planet).
Per Gaia Planet
you have
colonized.



GAME NAME:
Terra Mystica

The conference of the
Council of Elders had
been interrupted by a
deafening turmoil.
The Witches! The
Witches! a young voice
was shouting, and fists were
knocking on the door of the assembly hall at which the ancestors
of the Chaos Magicians had met. Finally, the door had been opened, and a young
female magician came rushing into the hall. Ive seen
them! she was shouting while gasping for breath. The
stern looks of the elders made her pause.
How dare you break in on our conference? the venerable spokeswoman of the Council of Elders sharply rebuked the disturber. And if this is really important, then
talk to us reasonably. What did you see?
Shara Ninde, the young Chaos Magician, took a deep
breath and made herself report everything that she saw,
one thing at a time. Ive been to the south, on the edge
of the forest. Theres Witches everywhere. Theyre riding
their stupid broom sticks above our heads, then landing in
the southern forest. And their numbers are still growing!
Theyre about to settle here!
This was an unpleasant message indeed. The Council of
Elders had just decided to cut down the southern forest
to redirect some lava streams there and transform that
forestland into treeless wasteland  just how they liked it.
The teams for this task had already been formed. And now
it seemed the Witches had preempted that. Witches were a
forest-dwelling people and as such, they had spread to a
number of forests. Even worse
 they used to plant
trees where there
had been none to convert all land gradually
to forest. What a nightmare for the Chaos Magicians who try hard to transform all land into wasteland.
Then Malkuzar, an old and wise Chaos Magician, spoke
up. The reason they called him wise was that he had survived five or more of his self-experiments. There is nothing that can be done. Its not necessarily bad for us to
have neighbors, its good for trading. When building our
own settlements, we can save a lot of gold by trading.
Some of the elders nodded, others looked doubtful. But
our people are ready to go and commence the groundwork, argued the spokeswoman. Shall we just give up?
We need more wasteland!
Send Shara to the west, to the mountains, Malkuzar
suggested. Usually, there are some underground lava
streams in the mountains that we can open up. Mountains
are much easier to convert to wasteland than forests, anyway. This is how we may preempt the Witches!
The decision was taken. As to you, Shara The young
magician had to gulp when she met the serious look of
the old Malkuzar. As youre so keen, Ive got a mission
for you. Immediately travel to the west, to the mountains.
Check if things are still calm over there. Dwarves are usually hanging around in mountains. Thats just what we
needed.
In Terra Mystica each player governs one of 14 factions trying to develop more successfully than their opponents. Terra Mystica
is a magical world: its inhabitants are able to transform the terrain they are living in. Each faction is bound to a specific type of terrain: It can only build structures on its Home terrain. This is why each faction over the centuries needed to develop Terraforming
capability.
A faction either lives in the Plains, the Swamp, the Lakes, the Forest, the Mountains, the Wasteland, or the Desert 
and each of them strives to transform the terrain according to its needs.
In the game, the players need to expand to build Dwellings. However, as they gain Power when another player builds Dwellings or upgrades Structures directly adjacent to them, each player has to face the challenge of finding the right balance between adjacency to other
players and free space for expansion.
Existing Dwellings can be upgraded in multiple steps: to a Trading house at first, then to a Stronghold or Temple. One temple can be
upgraded to a Sanctuary. Dwellings provide Workers. Upgrading a Structure increases your income in Coins, Power, or Priests.
A Dwelling may become a Sanctuary in three steps. Alternatively, one Trading house may become a Stronghold.
Besides geographic expansion and upgrading Structures, players can also develop four Cults: Earth, Water, Fire, and Air. Progress in these
will be displayed on the Cult board. Developing them also provides an increase in Power and other rewards.
The Cult board
Cult of Fire
Cult of Water
Cult of Earth
Cult of Air
In the end, the player who developed their faction the best wins the game.
Town key
(indicates that you need
to found a Town first to
advance to the last space
of a Cult track)
Power gained when
advancing on the
Cult track
Order of the
Cult of Air
(enables you to advance multiple steps on
the track at once)

COMPONENTS:
- 65 natural-colored Workers
- 40 small Coins (value 1)
- 25 medium Coins (value 2)
- 20 big Coins (value 5)
- 65 purple Power tokens (occasionally simply called Power)
- 1 orange Starting player token
- 17 Action tokens (used for Power and 10 Town tiles 8 rectangular Scoring tiles
Special actions)
- 1 Game end token
- 5 100 Victory points tokens
- 28 oval Favor tiles 9 Bonu 28 oval Favor tiles 9 Bonus cards
(1+3+3 tiles per Cult) (depicted (1+3+3 tiles per Cult) (depicted as scrolls) )
- 12 zip-lock bags
- this rule book plus appendices in German
- 1 Game board with the map in its initial state 1 Cult board 7 Faction boards
Note: As this game cannot be played
with more than five players, it can
never happen that all seven colors are
used within the same session.
- 56 Terrain tiles per faction color (green, yellow, blue, brown, red, black, grey): (double-sided)
- 8 Dwellings
- 4 Trading houses
- 1 Stronghold
- 3 Temples
- 1 Sanctuary
- 7 Priests
- 7 Markers
- 3 Bridges

SETUP:
Put the Game board in the middle of the table and the Cult board
next to it.
Assignment of factions
For your first game, we recommend you play Terra Mystica with
predefined factions. Depending on the number of players, take the
recommended factions and distribute them among the players:
2 players: Witches (green), and Nomads (yellow)
3 players: Witches (green), Nomads (yellow),
and Alchemists (black)
4 players: Witches (green), Nomads (yellow),
Halflings (brown), and Mermaids (blue)
5 players: Witches (green), Nomads (yellow), Halflings (brown),
Mermaids (blue), and Giants (red)
Components in faction colors
Each Faction board has a Transformation cycle. It shows the seven
types of terrain with the Home terrain of a given faction highlighted by its larger size. (The color of your Home terrain matches
your factions color.)
Take all the tokens in your factions color:
Priests, Structures, Markers, and the Bridges.
(Priests, Structures, and Bridges are limited by the token quantity.)
Put the 7 Priests and the 3 Bridges next to your Faction board.
Put the Structures on the corresponding spaces on your Faction
board.
Priests and Bridg Priests and Bridges are put ne e put next to the F xt to the Faction boar action board
forming your supply.
This section consists of two parts. For your first play, please follow the instructions of the static introductory game.
Add the changes for the variable main game in your second play at the earliest.
Red text in italics and parentheses highlights differences between
the base rules and faction-specific ones. These differences are also
depicted on each individual Faction board and are explained in
detail on the last page of this rule book (see Appendix VI).
Faction setup
The setup for each faction is depicted on its Faction board.
Starting resources
Collect your starting resources. They are depicted at the top right
corner of your Faction board, under your factions name:
Workers Coins Priests
of your color
Take the depicted resources and place them on your Faction board.
(On top of these starting resources, you will get your income for the
first round. See page 8.)
The Witches get 3 Workers and 15 Coins during setup.
Distribute the 7 Markers of your
color.
Place one Marker on the leftmost
space of the Shipping track (value 0).
(Only the Mermaids start with
value 1. The Fakirs and Dwarves
do not have Shipping and therefore
do not need this Marker.)
Place one Marker on the bottommost space of the Exchange track of
your Faction board  this is the space
where 3 Workers equal 1 Spade.
(The Darklings do not need this
Marker.)
Place another Marker on space 20
of the Victory point track on the
Game board.
Distribute the remaining 4 Markers
on space 0 of each of the 4 Cult
tracks on the Cult board.

SETUP:

FIRST PLAY:
Game and Cult board
For your first game, we recommend you play with the following setup. What follows is the setup for a 4-player game explained in detail.
The setup for a different number of players follows afterwards.
Cult advancements
Your Faction board depicts some Cult symbols next to the starting
resources. For each such symbol, move the corresponding Marker
on the Cult board up one space.
The Nomads (yellow) start on space 1 in the Cults of Fire and
Earth, the Halflings (brown) start on space 1 in the Cults of Air and
Earth, the Witches (green) start on space 2 in the Cult of Air, and the
Mermaids (blue) start on space 2 in the Cult of Water.
Bowls of Power
Your Faction board displays three Bowls of Power at its top left corner. Distribute a total of 12 Power tokens (occasionally simply called
Power) between Bowls I and II as indicated on your Faction board.
The Witches start with
7 Power in Bowl II
and
5 Power in Bowl I.
The Bonus cards are depicted as
scrolls. Which ones you use depends
on the number of players. The figure
shows the cards used in a 4-player
game.
There is a pr e is a predefined or ined order of
Scoring tiles. Cover the right
half of the uppermost Scoring
tile with the Game end token .
The covered part shall be
ignored during the game.
Lay out the Favor tiles
in a 3x4 pattern.
From left to right, take the Dwellings off your Faction boards and place them on the Game board as depicted.
Sort the Workers, Coins, and Town tiles
and put them easily accessible next to
the Game board. Turn the 10 Town tiles
face-up.
Put one Action token above
each of the 6 Power action
spaces on the Game board.
Put the remaining Action tokens next to the Game board.
The player who most recently has dug a planting bed in their garden takes the Starting player token
and becomes the Starting player.
The map consists of Terrain and River spaces .
The Bonus cards and setup for a 5-player game.
The Bonus cards and setup for a 2-player game. The Bonus cards and setup for a 3-player game.
Unlike the introductory game, randomly select which Bonus cards and Scoring tiles to use.
Then, after these basic parameters are set, freely choose your factions. Also, freely place your first Dwellings.
(The positions of the first Dwellings are not preset.)
Note: Each faction (but one) has two special abilities: one from the
beginning of the game on, the other one once its Stronghold has
been built. These abilities are depicted on the Faction board and
explained in detail on the last page of this rule book: Make sure
all players know the special abilities of the participating factions
before starting the game.
special ability gained
after building
the Stronghold
special ability from the
beginning of the game on
Bonus cards
Shuffle the 9 Bonus cards. The number of cards needed in the game
depends on the number of players.
No. of players 2 3 4 5
No. of Bonus cards needed 5 6 7 8
Randomly draw the required number of Bonus cards and place
them face-up next to one another.
(Put the remaining cards back into the game box.)
Choosing a Faction board
The Starting player chooses a faction and takes its Faction board.
In clockwise order, each other player takes one of the remaining
Faction boards and chooses which side to use.
Note: Alternatively, randomly assign the factions. (Take one
Dwelling of each color and randomly distribute them among the
players.) Then choose one of the two factions: the front or back of
the corresponding Faction board.
Once each player has decided on a faction, proceed with the faction setup as explained for the introductory game. Also, distribute
the components of your color as explained there. However, do not
place your Dwellings on the Game board, yet (see Placing the
first Structures, page 8).
Scoring tiles
Randomly draw 6 Scoring tiles and put them face-up on the
Game board in random order. Each tile corresponds to a
round. (Put the remaining two tiles back into the game box.)
Cover the right half of the uppermost Scoring tile with the
Game end token.
Reduced Scoring tile for round 6
Scoring tile for round 5
Scoring tile for round 4
Scoring tile for round 3
Scoring tile for round 2
Scoring tile for round 1

CHANGES IN THE MAIN GAME:
Nomads are a horse people of the desert. They used
to be living in tents and always on the move. Even today, they build their dwellings using plain and light
materials. This way they can populate large areas really quickly. Nomads only dwell in deserts, and their
hordes of horsemen can cause a sand storm that may
propagate to neighboring landscapes. propagate to neighboring landscapes.
There is a Scoring tile
for each of the six rounds.
Each of them displays
how to get Victory points in
a given round:
by building Dwellings (Action #1,
page 9), Trading houses, the Stronghold, or the Sanctuary (Action #4,
page 11). Additional Victory points may
be awarded for transforming Terrain spaces
(spade symbol) and founding Towns (key
symbol).
You will be facing a dilemma: on the one
hand, you might want to build the best
Structures for your faction (one faction
wants a quick Stronghold, another many
Temples), on the other hand, you might
want to concentrate on the Structures that
score Victory points this round.
Three out of the nine Bonus cards award
Victory points when you have completed
all the actions you wish to take in the
current Action phase (called passing):
Then, Victory points are either awarded for
- all of your Dwellings on the Game board,
- all of your Trading houses on the Game
board, or
- your Stronghold and Sanctuary on the
Game board.
Two Favor tiles award Victory points for
Dwellings and Trading houses whenever
you build them.
Another Favor tile awards Victory points
for already built Trading houses when
passing.
You get Victory points when founding
Towns. (More details on page 14.)
You also get additional rewards on top of
that.
At the end of the game, the player with the most Victory points wins the game. The following figure displays the various ways
to get Victory points in this game. (Victory points are depicted as brown squares containing a laurel wreath.)
While reading this rule book, you can come back to this page every now and then and get a better view of the context. This section has no
relevance for understanding the rules. Any information found on this page is also explained elsewhere in this rule book.
You get Victory points when improving
your Shipping (Action #2, page 11)
or
Terraforming skills (Action #3, page 11).
This is why these actions are not only useful in the beginning of the game, but also
towards its end.
Some factions have special abilities to
gain additional Victory points. (For example, the Alchemists are particularly good
at converting Coins to Victory points.)
At the end of the game, Victory points are awarded for the largest
connected areas on the Game board (Area scoring).
Improving your Shipping and Terraforming skills not only provides Victory points directly, but is also helpful in creating a large
connected area.
Area scoring Area scoring Area scoring
Cult scoring scoring
Also at the end of the game, Victory points are awarded for
progress on the four Cult tracks (Cult scoring).
On the one hand, you want to have a lot of Dwellings to create a large connected area but on the other hand, the more
valuable Temples and the Sanctuary provide a lot of Priests. These
are needed to score well in the Cult scoring (Action #5, page 13).
Close adjacency to other players enables you to trade Victory
points for Power (see page 12).
(This is why you start the game with 20 Victory points.)

GOAL OF THE GAME:
Chaos Magicians appreciate the forces of destruction
and feel the best when in dismal wastelands. They
worship fire and are always looking for underground
lava streams that they try to force to erupt and hit the
surface to transform even more land into wasteland.
Chaos Magicians also have a certain power over time
 they are able to freeze time for other people so they
can wreak havoc undisturbed.
Placing the first Structures
Skip this section when reading for the first time. In the introductory
game, the first Structures are placed on predefined spaces.
Beginning with the Starting player and in clockwise order, place
one of your Dwellings on an existing Home terrain. Then, with the
last player and in counterclockwise order, place a second Dwelling
in the same fashion. (The Nomads place their third Dwelling after
all players have placed their second one. The Chaos Magicians
place their only Dwelling after all other players have placed all of
their Dwellings  if necessary, after the Nomads have placed their
third Dwelling.)
Details
- Dwellings may only be placed on a factions Home terrain.
(Other than that, there are no restrictions.)
When placing the first Structures,
players may not transform any
Terrain spaces.
This will only be possible later
in the game.
- All Structures, incl. the Dwellings, are taken from left to right off
your Faction board.
After placing the first Structures, there will be empty spaces on the
Dwelling track. These spaces define your income (see below).
Choosing the first Bonus card
Beginning with the last player and in counterclockwise order,
each choose and take one Bonus card.
Bonus cards provide additional income,
unlock Special actions or award
Victory points for certain Structures
at the end of a round.
Place 1 Coin from the general supply on each of the leftover Bonus
cards. (The purpose of these Coins is to make the less frequently
taken Bonus cards more attractive in later rounds.)
At the end of each round, there will be
3 leftover Bonus cards that each get 1 Coin.
Each of the six rounds goes through three phases:
PHASE I: Income Phase - PHASE II: Action Phase - PHASE III: Cult bonuses and Clean-up Phase
Collect new Workers, Coins, Priests, and Power.
You also go through this phase on the 1st round. Consequently, you
first collect your faction-specific starting income and then also the
income for the 1st round.
Your income depends on the Structures you
have built, on the Bonus card you have chosen,
and (later in the game) on the Favor tiles you
own. On all components, income is symbolized
by an open hand.
Basic income for Structures
Workers: Take a number of Workers from the general supply equal
to the number of visible Worker symbols on your Dwelling track.
In Phase I, this player
collects 3 Workers as
indicated on his
Dwelling track.
Coins: Take a number of Coins from the general supply equal to
the number of visible Coin symbols on your Trading house track.
Priests: Take a number of Priests from your supply equal to the
number of visible Priest symbols on your Temple track. Another
Priest symbol will be visible once you have built your Sanctuary.
(Both the Swarmlings Sanctuary and the Darklings Sanctuary
provide 2 Priests.)
Put the newly gained Workers, Coins, and Priests on your Faction board. (If the supply of Workers or Coins runs out, replace
the missing components with something else. Only your supply of
Priests is limited.)
Power: Power is gained according to the visible Power symbols
on the Trading house track. The Stronghold usually provides additional Power (except for the Alchemists who collect 6 Coins instead, or the Chaos Magicians who collect 2 Workers instead, or
the Fakirs who collect 1 Priest instead).
How to use Power is explained in the next section, "The Bowls of
Power".

PHASE I: INCOME:

FLOW OF PLAY OVER SIX ROUNDS:

FLOW OF PLAY:
Additional income for cards and tiles
Beside the income collected via your Faction board, add the income depicted on your Bonus card (see Appendix IV, page 19) and
Favor tiles (see Appendix II, page 18).
If you got the depicted Favor tile and Bonus card,
you would get the following:
1 Worker
6 Coins
1 Power
The Bowls of Power
Each player has 12 Power tokens that are distributed among three
Bowls. Power actions (see Action #6, page 13) require Power in
Bowl III (the one on the right).
In this scenario,
you have 5 Power at
your disposal. You may
use all of the Power
in Bowl III regardless
of the number of
Power tokens in
Bowls I and II.
Whenever you gain Power in the game (as income, when an opponent builds Structures, or by advancing on the Cult tracks), you do
not get new Power tokens, but rather move the existing ones from
Bowl to Bowl. Also, when spending Power on a Power action, you
do not lose Power tokens, but move them around again.
Power tokens move (always in clockwise order) according to the
following rules:
Gaining Power
When gaining Power, proceed in the following order.
1. If there are Power tokens in Bowl I, for each 1 Power
you gain move one token from Bowl I to Bowl II.
2. Once Bowl I is empty, for each 1 Power you gain
move one token from Bowl II to Bowl III.
3. Once all Power tokens are in Bowl III, you cannot
gain further Power.
If you gain 3 Power in
this scenario, move the
2 tokens from Bowl I
to Bowl II first, then move
1 token from Bowl II to
Bowl III as now Bowl I
is empty.
Spending Power
You can only spend Power tokens that are in Bowl III.
Move them to Bowl I when spending them.
After gaining 3 Power
in the above scenario,
you can now spend up
to 6 Power for a Power
action. More about
these later.
During the Action phase, beginning with the Starting player and in
clockwise order, each player takes exactly one Action. Continue to
do so until no player wants to take any more Actions.
There are eight possible Actions to choose from. Except for passing, all Actions can be taken multiple times during the same Action
phase (but only once per turn).
Overview of Actions
This section explains the relations between the Actions.
Action #1 is to build Dwellings on unoccupied terrain. Actions #2
and #3 facilitate building. At the end of the game, there is a special
scoring for the largest connected area.
Action #4 is to upgrade Structures. Many factions need to build
their Stronghold as soon as possible. On the other hand, Temples
and the Sanctuary are also very valuable as they provide Priests
and Favor tiles, needed to score well during the Cult scoring at the
end of the game.
Action #5 directly affects the Cult scoring and provides additional
Power via Priests and Cults. Power can then be used for special
Power actions (#6).
Action #7 explains the Special actions that you can unlock during
the game.
Finally, Action #8 needs to be taken when you cannot or do not
want to take any more Actions in the current Action phase.
1 Transform and Build
First, you may change the type of one Terrain space. Then, if you
have changed its type to your Home terrain, you may immediately
build a Dwelling on that space.
Building a Dwelling
In order to build a Dwelling on a Terrain space, this space
needs to be
- of your color (i.e. it needs to be your Home terrain)
- unoccupied
- directly or indirectly adjacent to one of your
- Structures (Adjacency is defined in the next
section).
Also, you need to pay its building costs. Each
Dwelling costs 1 Worker and 2 Coins. (Exceptions:
The Engineers build Dwellings for 1 Worker and
1 Coin, the Swarmlings for 2 Workers and 3 Coins.)

PHASE II: ACTIONS:
Giants are beings of enormous size and physical
strength. They can pull out trees or level out mountains
with ease  as a matter of fact, they actually enjoy it.
They are able to transform any landscape into wasteland in no time. Various Giants have already tried to
transform land into something else, but it ended up being wasteland anyway. Apparently, they simply have
no knack for the finer things.
Transforming a Terrain space
To ensure the first condition is met, you
are allowed to transform one unoccupied Terrain space into your Home terrain immediately before building a
Dwelling. Place a Terrain tile of your
color on that space.
Transformation has its price: Each step between the
source and destination terrain on the Transformation
cycle of your Faction board costs 1 Spade. Thus, transforming adjacent types of terrain (on the Transformation
cycle) into one another costs 1 Spade, with a maximum
cost of up to 3 Spades if they are on opposite sides of the
cycle as you can move in either direction on the cycle.
(Exception: Giants always have to pay exactly 2 Spades
to transform any type of terrain into their Home terrain.)
Spades can be acquired in a variety of ways.
You may exchange Workers* for Spades. The Exchange track of
your Faction board displays the Exchange rate: At the beginning of
the game, this is usually 3 Workers for 1 Spade (see Action #3).
The Marker indicates that the Exchange rate is
3 Workers for
1 Spade.
1 or 2 Spades can be acquired via certain Power actions (see
Action #6, page 13, or Appendix I, page 17).
One of the Bonus cards provides 1 Spade
(see Action #7, page 14, or Appendix IV, page 19).
(Halflings and Giants gain additional Spades for immediate use
after building their Stronghold.)
Spades may only be applied to a single Terrain space. However,
there are two special cases:
- If the Spades gained via a Power action or Bonus card do not suffice to transform a Terrain space into your Home terrain, you may
exchange Workers* for the missing Spades (at the current Exchange rate of your Exchange track).
(*The Darklings pay 1 Priest for each missing Spade instead.)
- When gaining 2 Spades, if you only need one of them to transform a Terrain space into your Home terrain, you may apply the
second Spade on another Terrain space. However, you may not
place a Dwelling on this second space.
(The same is true when the Halflings build their Stronghold, immediately gaining 3 Spades, see last page.)
Details on building Dwellings
- When building, take Structures (incl. Dwellings) from left to right
off your Faction board.
- If the current Scoring tile depicts a Dwelling, you get 2 Victory
points for each Dwelling you build.
This Scoring tile awards
2 Victory points for
building Dwellings.
Details on using Spades
- You may not save Spades for future Actions. Spades need to be
used immediately.
- If the left side of the current Scoring tile depicts a Spade, you get
Victory points for using Spades during the current Action phase.
This Scoring tile awards
2 Victory points for
using Spades.
- After transforming a Terrain space, you do not need to build a
Dwelling immediately. You can do this in another Action at a later
point in time.
- You do not need to transform a Terrain space into your Home
terrain, you may stop at any other type of terrain (e.g. if you can
not afford more Spades). However, during their turns, your opponents may claim that Terrain space for themselves. (Terrain
spaces with Terrain tiles on them but no Structures are considered
unoccupied.)
- Even when transforming a Terrain space without building a
Dwelling, the transformed Terrain space needs to be directly or
indirectly adjacent to one of your Structures (see page 11).
- You may not transform a Terrain space containing Structures.
- You may also get Spades via Cult bonuses (see Phase III of a
round, page 15). As these Spades are gained outside the Action
phase, you may not build a Dwelling immediately afterwards, nor
do you get to exchange Workers for more Spades. (You have to
wait for the next Action phase to build a Dwelling.)
Auren are mysterious forest-dwelling people that are
said to exist without a physical body. Unfortunately, one
cannot prove this as you will never get to see them when
wandering through the woods. When threatened or expecting relatives to visit, they simply blend with the trees
and become invisible.
Adjacency
Due to some other rules (see Power via Structures on page 12),
it is important to distinguish between direct and indirect adjacency
of Terrain spaces. (This distinction does not matter when building
Dwellings, which is what this section is all about.)
Direct adjacency
Terrain spaces and Structures are considered directly adjacent to
one another if they share a hexagon edge. Additionally, Terrain
spaces and Structures separated by a River but connected via a
Bridge are also considered directly adjacent to one another (see
Power action Building a Bridge, Appendix I on page 17).
These Terrain spaces are directly
adjacent to one another.
As soon as you build a Structure on
the other Terrain space, both
Structures will be considered
directly adjacent as well.
Indirect adjacency
Terrain spaces and Structures are considered indirectly adjacent to
one another if they are (not directly adjacent to one another, but)
separated by one or more River spaces and your Shipping value is
high enough to cover the distance. (Shipping is another Action and
will be explained in the next section.)
(Terrain spaces and Structures that Dwarves can reach via Tunneling and Fakirs via Carpet Flight are also considered indirectly
adjacent to one another.)
In order to make these
Structures indirectly adjacent
to one another, you need a
Shipping value of at least 2.
Note: When building Dwellings, your opponents get the chance
to gain Power. This will be explained in Action #4 Upgrading a
Structure. Before that, let us have a look at the following two
Actions that facilitate building Dwellings for the remainder of the
game: advancing on the Shipping track and lowering the Exchange
rate for Spades.
2 Advancing on the Shipping track
Terrain spaces and Structures need to be indirectly adjacent to one
another if you want to expand beyond River spaces.
In order to transform Terrain spaces or build Structures beyond
River spaces, as an Action, you may move the Marker on your
Shipping track forward one space. Your Faction board displays the
costs of this Action: 1 Priest and 4 Coins.
As a reward for taking this Action, get a number of Victory points
as indicated on the Shipping space you move to.
The Auren (green) get 3 Victory points for advancing on the Shipping track. From now on, the green Dwellings in the example above
are considered indirectly adjacent to one another.
3 Lowering the Exchange rate for Spades
At the beginning of the game, Spades cost 3 Workers each (see
Action #1). In order to reduce this cost down to 2 Workers or even
down to 1 Worker, as an Action, you may move the Marker on
your Exchange track up one space. Your Faction board displays the
costs of this Action: 2 Workers, 5 Coins, and 1 Priest.
(Exception: Halflings pay fewer Coins, and Darklings do not
even have an Exchange track as they exchange Priests for Spades.)
As a reward for taking this Action, you get 6 Victory points.
From now on,
the Auren (green)
only need to pay
2 Workers for
each Spade.
4 Upgrading a Structure
Structures can be upgraded step by step. The costs for each upgrade
are depicted on the Faction board to the left of a Structure.
Details
- Always take newly placed Structures from left to right off your
Faction board.
- When upgrading, you are replacing Structures by one another.
Take the Structure that you wish to upgrade off the Game board
and return it to your Faction board. This reduces your income
for the given type of Structure. (When returning Structures to
your Faction board, always put them as far to the right as possible
on their proper track.) Place the new Structure on the same space
on the Game board where the just removed Structure has been.
When building a Trading house, return a Dwelling to your Faction
board.
There are four possible upgrades (two of which can only be done
once per game).
Dwelling Trading house
Upgrading a Dwelling to a Trading house costs 2 Workers and
6 Coins*. If there is at least one opponents Structure directly
adjacent to that Dwelling, you only need to pay 3 Coins instead of
6. If the current Scoring tile depicts a Trading house, get 3 Victory
points for this upgrade.
This Scoring tile awards
3 Victory points for
building a Trading house.
Trading house Stronghold
Upgrading a Trading house to a Stronghold costs a number of
Workers and Coins depending on the faction. After building its
Stronghold, each faction gains a specific special ability (see Appendix VI, page 20). If the current Scoring tile depicts a Stronghold, get 5 Victory points for this upgrade.
Trading house Temple
Upgrading a Trading house to a Temple costs 2 Workers and
5 Coins*. As a reward, immediately choose and take one Favor
tile** and put it face-up in front of you. (You may immediately take
advantage of the newly gained Favor tile, or use it during the current Action phase, respectively.) You may not take a Favor tile that
you already have. For further details on Favor tiles see Appendix
II on page 18.
(*Engineers pay less and Swarmlings pay more when upgrading
to a Trading House or Temple.)
Temple Sanctuary
Upgrading a Temple to a Sanctuary costs a number of Workers and
Coins depending on the faction. This is also awarded with a Favor
tile**. If the current Scoring tile depicts a Sanctuary, get 5 Victory
points for this upgrade.
(**Chaos Magicians always get 2 Favor tiles instead of 1.)
Finally, more about the already mentioned rewards you get when
an opponent builds a Structure.
Power via Structures
Each Structure has a Power value. The Power value of each Structure is depicted to the right of its track on the Faction board:
The Stronghold and Sanctuary
have a Power value of 3.
Trading houses and Temples
have a Power value of 2.
Dwellings
have a Power value of 1.
When building a Dwelling (Action #1) or upgrading a Structure
(Action #4), you must inform the owners of Structures directly adjacent to your Structure Structure Structure that they may gain Power (see The Bowls
of Power, page 9):
In order to determine the total number of Power an opponent
may gain, add up the Power values of their Structures directly
adjacent to your newly built Structure.
The Mermaid player (blue) needs to
inform the Nomad player (yellow)
that he may gain exactly 3 Power
due to the newly built blue Dwelling: 1 Power for the yellow Dwelling plus 2 Power for the yellow
Temple. The Nomad player does
not gain Power for the yellow Trading house as it is not directly adjacent to the blue Dwelling.
Details
- You do not gain Power for your own Structures. Power can only
be gained when an opponent builds Structures.
- Beginning with the player to the left of the active player and in
clockwise order, each affected opponent needs to decide whether
to actually gain the Power or not. (The next section explains why
you might want to refuse to gain Power.)
The price of Power
Unfortunately, Power gained via Structures is not free. To gain that
Power, you need to lose a number of Victory points equal to one
fewer than the number of Power gained.
Thus, gaining 1/2/3/4/ Power costs 0/1/2/3/ Victory points.
In the above example, the Nomad player may gain 3 Power. If he does,
he will lose 2 Victory points.
Details
- You may not end up with a negative score when losing Victory
points.
- You may not gain less Power in order to save Victory points.
Either take it all or gain nothing. (Exceptions: If you have not
enough Power tokens in Bowls I and II, gain as many Power as
needed to move all of them to Bowl III and lose Victory points accordingly. Also, you may gain less Power to avoid a negative
score. In this case, only gain as many Power as needed to end up
with 0 Victory points.)
- You only lose Victory points when gaining Power via Structures.
You do not lose any Victory points when gaining Power otherwise.
Summary: How do I gain Power?
You gain Power
- when an opponent builds Structures (as explained above)
- as income from your Trading houses and Stronghold
(and Temples if you are playing the Engineers)
- as income from two specific
Bonus cards
- as income from two specific
Favor tiles
- as a one-time reward when founding
a Town and taking the specific Town
tile (see page 14 for details on founding a Town)
- as a one-time Cult bonus in Phase III
if the specific Scoring tile is up for
the current round (see page 15 for details on the Cult bonus)
- when advancing on the Cult tracks (as explained below).
Initially, Engineers have been a mountain tribe living in inaccessible valleys and ravines. They have
learned how to build bridges and mountain roads to
keep their remote settlements connected. They enjoy
dominating nature by means of technology. They appear eccentric to the other factions when poring over
their construction plans.
pear eccentric to the other factions when poring over
6 Power actions
There are two types of Power actions: fully-fledged Actions and
auxiliary Actions.
Power actions on the Game board
The Power actions on the Game board (indicated by orange octagons) may only be taken once per round  first come, first served.
Whenever taking one of these Actions, move a number of Power
tokens from Bowl III to Bowl I equal to its indicated cost. Then, put
an Action token on its space on the Game board to indicate that this
Action may not be taken any more this round.
Use Action tokens to cover taken Power actions. Power Actions
on the Game board cost 3, 4, or 6 Power.
All the Power actions on the Game board are explained in detail in
Appendix I on page 17.
Converions (anytime)
Anytime during your turn, on top of your Action, you may do any
number of Conversions. Therefore, you have the following options
(also depicted in Bowl III on your Faction board):
- Spend 5 Power for 1 Priest.
- Spend 3 Power for 1 Worker.
- Spend 1 Power for 1 Coin.
- Convert a Priest to a Worker.
- Convert a Worker to a Coin.
This illustration reminds you
of the available Conversions.
Details
- A Conversion is not considered your Turn action.
- On your turn, you may do any number of Conversions before
or after your Action.
Sacrificing Power
If you do not have enough Power in Bowl III to take a specific
Power or Conversion action, on top of your Action, you may move
Power tokens from Bowl II to Bowl III and then immediately take
the desired Action. However, for each Power token moved in this
fashion, you need to remove 1 Power token from Bowl II from the
game. From now on, you will irrevocably have to deal with fewer
Power tokens in your cycle. (You may not sacrifice Power if you
only have 1 Power token in Bowl II.)
These icons remind you
of the ability to
sacrifice Power.
Power via Cult tracks
Power can also be gained on the Cult
tracks of Earth, Water, Fire, and Air.
You gain 1/2/2/3 Power when advancing to the 3rd/5th/7th/10th space of a
Cult track. You only gain this Power
once when advancing to or passing by
these spaces.
The Nomad player (yellow) gains
4 Power for advancing these
3 spaces in the Cult of Air.
Only one player on space 10
Only one player may advance to space 10 of each Cult track. To do
so, you also need to have founded a Town for each space 10 you
want to advance to. See page 14 for details on founding a Town.
After founding two Towns,
you may advance to space 10
on two Cult tracks (unless
another player beats you to it).
5 Send a Priest to the Order of a Cult
There are 4 spaces below each of the
Cult tracks of Earth, Water, Fire, and
Air that each can hold exactly 1 Priest.
As an Action, you may place one of
your Priests on one such space to advance 3 or 2 spaces (as indicated on the
space) on the corresponding Cult track.
Details
- You may gain Power when advancing on a track (see Power
via Cult tracks above).
- There is no way of getting these Priests back. Keep in mind that
you only have a total of 7 Priests at your disposal.
If you do not want to lose a Priest, alternatively, return him to your
supply (next to your Faction board) and only advance 1 space.
Cultists love rituals. Their entire life is based on strict
rules. Even the simplest things are accompanied by secret symbols and invocations of the elements. For instance, when a Cultist wants to fill a bucket of water
from a well, he first needs to appease the elements of
earth and water which he is tearing apart, then he also
needs to ensure the element of fire that he is not going
to extinguish it with that water. This may seem overly
elaborate, but the Cultists also greatly benefit from the
power of the elements.
rules. Even the simplest things are accompanied by secret symbols and invocations of the elements. For instance, when a Cultist wants to fill a bucket of water
from a well, he first needs to appease the elements of
needs to ensure the element of fire that he is not going
to extinguish it with that water. This may seem overly
Witches live in the woods, but they also dominate the
air. Riding their brooms, they fly from place to place.
This is why a forest that has never seen a Witch before
all of a sudden may become full of Witches. Witches are
sociable, so they gladly join up in large Witch towns,
where they keep trading love potions and portable curses with each other.
air. Riding their brooms, they fly from place to place.
all of a sudden may become full of Witches. Witches are
sociable, so they gladly join up in large Witch towns,
7 Special actions
Each Special action may be taken only once per round.
Special actions, like Power actions, are indicated by orange octagons and can be gained in a variety of ways.
Some factions unlock a Special action when building
their Stronghold. (These are explained in Appendix VI
on page 20.)
After building their Stronghold,
the Witches may build a free
Dwelling once per round.
One Favor tile and one Bonus card provide a Special action to
advance 1 space on a Cult track. Another Bonus card provides a
free Spade for transforming a Terrain space.
Whenever taking one of these Special
actions, you may advance 1 space on a
Cult track of your choice.
Use Action tokens to cover taken Special actions.
8 Passing and new Starting player
On your turn, if you cannot or do not want to take any more
Action, you have to pass and stop taking Actions for the remainder
of this round.
The first player to pass becomesthe Starting player for
the next round (and takes the Starting player token).
When passing, immediately return your Bonus card
and take one of the three available ones. This may be
a card another player has already returned this round.
(Exception: Do not take any Bonus cards in the last
round of the game  round 6.) If there were Coins on
the newly taken Bonus card, put them on your Faction
board (see Coins on Bonus cards, page 15).
You may get Victory points when returning certain Bonus cards.
When passing and returning the Bonus card
depicted on the right, get 1 Victory point for
each of your Dwellings on the Game board.
When passing and returning the Bonus card
depicted on the left, get 2 Victory points for
each of your Trading houses on the Game
board.
When passing and returning the Bonus card
depicted on the right, get 4 Victory points
if you have already built your Stronghold
and/or 4 Victory points if you have already
built your Sanctuary.
Hint: Do not forget to get these Victory points. Always pay attention to the current Scoring tile: you may get Victory points
for building certain Structures, for using Spades, or founding
Towns.
Details
- Freely choose which one of the three available Bonus cards
you want to take. (You may not immediately take the card that
you have just returned.)
- You may wish to put the newly taken Bonus card face-down in
front of you to indicate that you have already passed.
- There is no limitation for how many resources you may keep
for the next round.
- You may take as many Actions as you wish, even if all other
players have already passed. As long as there is at least one
player left taking Actions, the current Action phase continues.
Founding a Town
During the course of the game, one or more Towns may be founded.
Towns are founded automatically whenever these two conditions
are met:
- There are at least 4 Structures of one color directly
adjacent to one another (see Adjacency, page 11).
Exception: Only 3 Structures are required if one of them
is a Sanctuary.
- These Structures have a combined Power value of at
least 7.
Reminder: Dwellings have a Power value of 1, Trading houses
and Temples have a Power value of 2, the Stronghold and Sanctuary have a Power value of 3.
Indicate a founded Town by choosing and taking a Town tile (see
Appendix V on page 19) and placing it under one of the Structures
forming that Town.
Town tile
Dwarves are always on a hunt for treasures and valuable ores, thus engage in non-stop burrowing in soil.
Their mines are usually located in the mountains, but
in the heat of digging, they sometimes end up digging
underneath a neighboring area. Even if this is inhabited, its inhabitants most often will only notice when
the Dwarves all of a sudden appear on the other side of
that area. Dwarves go through so much soil that they
are able to form new mountains from the spoil, so that
future generations of Dwarves may dig through these
all over again.
Mermaids are lovely water creatures inhabiting the
waters of Terra Mystica and traveling by its rivers. Deceived by their charm, many a landsman has forgotten
that the Mermaids preferably would like to transform
Terra Mystica into a world of water. Mermaids are able
to split their fishtail into two legs and traverse through
land; however, they only do so when going to flood it
with water, or when they need building materials for
their floating cities.
Mermaids are lovely water creatures inhabiting the
ceived by their charm, many a landsman has forgotten
that the Mermaids preferably would like to transform
to split their fishtail into two legs and traverse through
Fakirs have reduced their physical needs to a minimum and tremendously improved their spiritual forces. Their spirit rules over matter in such a way that
they are able to levitate things like carpets. Carpets are
very convenient flying devices when you know how to
operate them. In contrast to brooms, they are capable
of transporting load. Fakirs prefer to live in deserts as
these comply with their meditative lifestyle due to the
deserts considerable lack of plants and animals.
Founding a Town has three benefits:
- Immediately get a number of Victory points as indicated by the
chosen Town tile. Get additional Victory points if the current
Scoring tile depicts a key.
This Scoring tile awards
5 Victory points for
each newly founded Town.
- Immediately and only once, collect the rewards depicted on the
chosen Town tile (either +1 space on each of the Cult tracks,
1 Priest, 2 Workers, 6 Coins, or 8 Power).
- Each Town provides a key. Each key allows you to advance to the
last space of one Cult track (space 10). (Without a key, you have
to stop at space 9.)
Details
- When founding a Town, all Structures directly adjacent to one
another form that Town (Bridges are key here), even if there are
more than the required number of Structures.
- Indirect adjacency (especially via River spaces) has no relevance when founding a Town. (Exception: The Mermaids may
ignore any one River space when founding a Town.)
- Building new Structures directly adjacent to an existing Town
expands that Town rather than forming a new one.
- When a Structure is built combining two existing Towns to one
larger Town, these Towns do not lose their individual rights or
functions (despite the fact that you cannot tell anymore where
their borders are).
- The total number of Towns for one game is limited to 10.
When all players have passed (see Action #8 on the left), the current Action phase is over. In rounds 1 to 5, the Action phase is followed by a Clean-up phase preparing the next round. (There is no
Clean-up phase after the last round.)
Cult Bonuses
First, the Cult bonuses depicted on the current Scoring tile need
to be awarded. Each player with enough progress in the depicted
Cults gets the depicted reward, multiple times if need be.
In this case, if you were on space 6 in the Cult of Air, you would
get 3 Workers, and if you were on space 8 in the Cult of Earth, you
would get 2 Spades.
PHASE III: CULT BONUSES AND
CLEAN-UP PHASE
Details on the Cult bonus Spades
- The Cult bonuses are awarded in the play order of the next round.
(This is relevant for Spades.)
- You may not acquire additional Spades when getting them as a
Cult bonus.
(Neither may the Fakirs do a Carpet Flight, nor the Dwarves
do Tunneling when getting Spades as a Cult bonus. A Carpet
Flight and Tunneling have costs that cannot be paid outside the Action phase. Also, if the Giants get only a single Spade as a Cult
bonus, this Spade will be forfeit.)
- You may not save Spades for future turns.
- You may apply these Spades on different adjacent Terrain
spaces.
- You may not build a Dwelling in Phase III.
Return Action tokens
If there are any Action tokens on
- Power action spaces on the
Game board,
- Special action spaces on
Faction boards, or
- Favor tiles and Bonus cards,
remove them from there.
Coins on Bonus cards
Put 1 Coin from the general supply on each of the three leftover
Bonus cards. (If a card has not been taken by any player for two
rounds, it will now have 2 Coins on it.)
Turn the Scoring tile face-down
As the last act of the current round, turn the current Scoring tile facedown so that only the Scoring tiles of the following rounds remain
face-up.
You can tell by the Scoring tiles
in which round you are 
in this example: round 3.
Halflings are nice little guys, not overly strong, intelligent, or apt in magic. So, hard work is their only
way to achieve something in life. And with hard work,
they achieve amazing things. Wherever a family of
Halflings appears, the landscape will become flourishing farmland in a heartbeat  and this with only their
own hands work.
The game ends after all players have passed in the Action phase of the last round. Afterwards, there is a final scoring. (As indicated by the
Game end token, there are no Cult bonuses in the final round.)
Cult scoring
Score each of the four Cult tracks
individually:
- 8 Victory points for the player
highest on a track.
- 4 Victory points for the player
second highest on a track.
- 2 Victory points for the player
third highest on a track.
These values are also depicted in the top
left corner of the Game board. You cannot gain any Victory points when being
still on space 0. In case of a tie, evenly
divide the Victory points of the respective
tiers among the tied players (round down
if necessary).
Area scoring
Determine the number of your Structures directly or indirectly
adjacent to one another (see Adjacency, page 11). With the proper
Shipping value, scattered areas may be indirectly adjacent to one
another (and, thus, considered connected).
All of the eight depicted Structures are considered connected with
a Shipping value of 1. You may skip a single River space at any
number of locations on the Game board in order to connect Structures. However, in order to skip two adjacent River spaces, a Shipping value of 2 is required.
(For Dwarves, Structures that can be reached via Tunneling are
considered connected. For Fakirs, Structures that can be reached
via Carpet Flight are also considered connected. Carpet Flight
may span over 1 or 2 spaces. The costs for Tunneling and Carpet
Flight need not to be paid at this point. However, Witches cannot
connect spaces via Witches Ride, see last page.)
- The player with the highest number of
connected Structures gets 18 Victory points.
- The player with the second highest number of
connected Structures gets 12 Victory points.
- The player with the third highest number of
connected Structures gets 6 Victory points.
These values are also depicted in the top left corner of the Game
board. In case of a tie, evenly divide the Victory points of the
respective tiers among the tied players (round down if necessary).
Example: One player has 20 connected Structures, the other three
players have 19. The first player gets 18 Victory points. 12+6+0=18
Victory points need to be divided among the other three players.
Thus, the other players each get 6 Victory points.
Resource scoring
Finally, get Victory points for left-over resources: get 1 Victory
point per 3 Coins. (All other resources may be converted to Coins
for this purpose, see Conversions on page 13.)
(The Alchemists get 1 Victory point per 2 Coins.)
The winner of the game
The player with the highest number of Victory points wins
the game.
In case of a tie, there is more than one winner.
Credits
Terra Mystica has been designed by Helge Ostertag. The rules have
been adapted to the great variety of game plays in cooperation with
co-designer Jens Drgemller and Uwe Rosenberg. The variety of
factions is due to Jens Drgemller and Helge Ostertag.
Dennis Lohausen is responsible for the illustrations and graphic
design.
The editing has been done by Frank Heeren, who is responsible for
the graphic design and for the production, as well as Uwe Rosenberg, the writer of this rule book.
Representing the many play-testers and supporters, we would like
to thank Andreas Buhlmann, Bernadette Beckert, Carsten Strmer,
Christian Wojtko, Christine Heeren, Christof Tisch, Dirk Schmitz,
Marcel Straub, Mario Weise, Nicole Strauch, Pan Pollack, Ralph
Bruhn, and Stephan Rink.
Many thanks to our proof-readers: Grzegorz Kobiela, Inga Blecher,
Jesse Dean, Julian Steindorfer, Michael Winer, Mario Weise, Monika Harke, Rob Thompson, Rob Watson, and Sebastian Wehlmann.
Special thanks to Kay-Viktor Stegemann for the atmospheric accompanying texts, and Grzegorz Kobiela for the English translation of this game.
For questions about this game, feel free to contact us at
tm@feuerland-spiele.de
v1.0
Example:
Two players have advanced to space 9 in
the Cult of Fire.
8+4=12 Victory points
need to be divided between them.
Thus, they each get
6 Victory points.

END OF THE GAME AND FINAL SCORING:
From all the factions, Swarmlings are the most sociable one. They simply cannot bear loneliness. They
always wander about in large groups, being in water
most of the time, yet they get along on land just as well.
And when a Swarmling needs a work done, he may be
assured of the help from friends and relatives who will
give strong support. This way they even get the toughest work done.
From all the factions, Swarmlings are the most sociable one. They simply cannot bear loneliness. They
always wander about in large groups, being in water
most of the time, yet they get along on land just as well.
And when a Swarmling needs a work done, he may be
assured of the help from friends and relatives who will
give strong support. This way they even get the toughAlchemists strive for a deeper knowledge of the elements forming the world and how to use them for their
purposes. They know how to create gold  the process,
however, is very elaborate and is only worth its while
when you really need that gold. Alchemists prefer to settle in Swamps as these provide a steady supply of sulfur
and other reagents.
Alchemists strive for a deeper knowledge of the elepurposes. They know how to create gold  the process,
There are six appendices.
Appendix I explains the Power actions. These Actions are depicted on the Power action spaces on the Game board.
Appendix II is about the Favor tiles, Appendix III presents the Town tiles, Appendix IV explains the Bonus cards,
Appendix V features the Scoring tiles, and Appendix VI elaborates on the special rules of all factions.
Appendix I: The Power action spaces on the Game board
In each round, there are six Actions available to all players, but once they are taken, they may not be taken again for the remainder of
the current round.
Building a Bridge
By moving 3 Power tokens from Bowl III to
Bowl I, you may build a Bridge over a River
space. In order to do this, you need to have a
Structure on at least one of the Terrain spaces
connected by the Bridge. Building the Bridge connects these
Terrain spaces and they become directly adjacent to one another
(see Adjacency, page 11).
The Game board indicates
where Bridges may be built
by depicting unfinished
bridges.
Details
- Without Shipping, you can only reach a Terrain space beyond a
River space by building a Bridge. During your next Action or
later, you may then transform this Terrain space and/or build a
Dwelling on it (see Action #1, page 9).
- Structures connected via Bridges count towards the founding of a
Town (see page 14), whereas indirect adjacency via Shipping
does not.
- Once built, you cannot reclaim your Bridges. Keep in mind that
you can only build a total of three Bridges.
1 Priest
By moving 3 Power tokens from Bowl III to
Bowl I, you may take 1 Priest from your supply and put it on your Faction board.
2 Workers
By moving 4 Power tokens from Bowl III
to Bowl I, you may take 2 Workers from the
general supply and put them on your Faction
board.
7 Coins
By moving 4 Power tokens from Bowl III to
Bowl I, you may take 7 Coins from the general
supply and put them on your Faction board.
1 Spade
By moving 4 Power tokens from Bowl III to
Bowl I, you may take Action #1 Transform
and Build (see page 9) getting 1 free Spade
for this purpose.
(If this Spade does not suffice to transform a given Terrain space
into your Home terrain, you may exchange Workers* for the missing Spades  at the current Exchange rate on your Exchange
track.)
Exchange track
2 Spades
By moving 6 Power tokens from Bowl III to
Bowl I, you may take Action #1 Transform
and Build (see page 9) getting 2 free Spades
for this purpose.
(If these Spades do not suffice to transform a given Terrain space
into your Home terrain, you may exchange Workers* for the missing
Spade  at the current Exchange rate on your Exchange track. If you
only need one Spade to transform a Terrain space into your Home
terrain, you may spend the second Spade on another Terrain space.
However, you may not place a Dwelling on this other space.)
(*Darklings need to exchange 1 Priest for each missing Spade.)

APPENDICES:
Appendix II: The Favor tiles
After building a sacred Structure (Temple or Sanctuary), immediately choose and take one Favor tile. (Chaos Magicians always take
two Favor tiles.) Put the Favor tile(s) face-up next to your Faction board. You may only have one tile of each type. There are 12 different
types of Favor tiles.
- 4 of the Favor tiles, immediately and only once, increase your
influence in a given Cult by 3. There is one each of any such tile.
- 8 of the Favor tiles immediately unlock a special ability. Additionally, immediately and only once, they increase your influence in a
given Cult by 1 or 2. There are three each of any such tile.
(While advancing on the Cult tracks, you may pass by certain spaces and gain Power, see Power via Cult tracks on page 13.)
Appendix III: The Scoring tiles
Each Scoring tile on the Game board represents one round. Their leftside indicates how to get additionalVictory points during theAction phase.
Their right side displays the Cult bonuses awarded at the end of that round (in Phase III). These bonuses depend on your progress on the Cult
tracks (and may be awarded multiple times for the same track).You do not need to spend the progress to get the bonus.
From now on, when founding a Town, your
Structures only need to have a combined Power
value of 6 instead of 7 (see Founding a Town,
page 14).
From now on, as a Special action (once per
Action phase), you may advance 1 space on a
Cult track of your choice. Use an Action token to
keep track of using this Special action (see Action
#7 on page 14).
In Phase I Income, gain 4 additional Power.
In Phase I Income, collect 1 additional Worker
and gain 1 additional Power.
Action phase: Get 2 additional Victory points
when building a Dwelling.
End of the round: Put 1 Priest from your supply on your Faction board for every 4 spaces you
have advanced in the Cult of Water.
Action phase: Get 2 additional Victory points
when building a Dwelling.
End of the round: Gain 4 Power for every
4 spaces you have advanced in the Cult of Fire
(see page 9 for details on Power).
Action phase: Get 3 additional Victory points
when building a Trading house.
End of the round: Get 1 Spade for every 4 spaces
you have advanced in the Cult ofAir and apply them
immediately (in the play order of the next round).
Action phase: Get 3 additional Victory points
when building a Trading house.
End of the round: Get 1 Spade for every 4 spaces
you have advanced in the Cult of Water and apply
them immediately (in the play order of the next
round).
In Phase I Income, collect 3 additional Coins.
When upgrading a Dwelling to a Trading house,
immediately get 3 additional Victory points.
From now on, when passing (see Action #8,
page 14), get 2/3/3/4 Victory points for 1/2/3/4
of your Trading houses on the Game board.
When building a Dwelling, immediately get
2 additional Victory points.
Action phase: Get 5 additional Victory points
when building your Stronghold or Sanctuary.
End of the round: Put 1 Worker from the general
supply on your Faction board for every 2 spaces
you have advanced in the Cult of Air.
Action phase: Get 5 additional Victory points
when building your Stronghold or Sanctuary.
End of the round: Put 1 Worker from the general
supply on your Faction board for every 2 spaces
you have advanced in the Cult of Fire.
Action phase: Get 2 additional Victory points for
each Spade when using them.
End of the round: Put 1 Coin from the general
supply on your Faction board for every space you
have advanced in the Cult of Earth.
Action phase: Get 5 additional Victory points
when founding a Town.
End of the round: Get 1 Spade for every 4 spaces
you have advanced in the Cult of Earth and apply
them immediately (in the play order of the next
round).
19
Darklings are said to be wicked and smarmy creatures
that lure others into dangerous marshy hollows for
fun, only to rob and then drown them. Only few have
tried to verify these rumors. Darklings are fairly skilled
in the elemental cults  thats for sure. Their priests
use their secret knowledge to bog even more land.
When taking this Town tile, get 6Victory points and
gain 8 Power (see page 9 for details on Power).
When taking this Town tile, get 5 Victory
points and put 6 Coins from the general supply
on your Faction board.
Appendix IV: The Bonus cards
There are nine different Bonus cards (depicted as scrolls). Their main purpose is to get additional income in Phase I. Bonus cards are only
valid for a single round. They are returned at the end of each round (see Action #8 on page 14).
Appendix V: The Town tiles
There are two each of 5 different Town tiles. When founding a Town, choose and take one of the remaining Town tiles and with it mark a
building in that Town. Each Town tile immediately provides a one-time bonus. (You may have multiple copies of the same Town tile.)
In Phase I Income, collect
6 additional Coins.
In Phase I Income, collect
4 additional Coins. Also, in
Phase II, you may take a Special action to advance 1 space
on a Cult track of your choice
for free. Use an Action token
to keep track of using this Special action.
In Phase I Income, collect
2 additional Workers. Also,
when returning this card after
passing, get 4 Victory points
if you have already built your
Stronghold and/or 4 Victory
points if you have already built
your Sanctuary.
In Phase I Income,
collect 1 additional Worker
and gain 3 additional Power.
In Phase I Income, collect
2 additional Coins. Also, in
Phase II as a Special action,
you may take Action #1 getting
1 freeSpade forthis purpose.Use
an Action token to keep track of
using this Special action. (You
may acquire additional Spades
by paying Workers if this Spade
does notsuffice to transform into
your Home terrain. Darklings
pay 1 Priest per Spade.)
In Phase I Income, collect
1 additional Worker. Also, when
returning this card after passing, get 2 Victory points for
each of your Trading houses
on the Game board.
When taking this Town tile, get 9 Victory points
and put 1 Priest from your supply on your Faction board.
When taking this Town tile, get 8 Victory points
and move 1 space forward on each of the 4 Cult
tracks.
When taking this Town tile, get 7 Victory points
and put 2 Workers from the general supply on
your Faction board.
In Phase I Income,
collect 1 additional Priest.
In Phase I Income, gain
3 additional Power. Also, in
Phase II and for this round
only, your Shipping value is
increased by 1. If you got this
Bonus card in round 6, this
increase will not count for the
final scoring. (Dwarves and
Fakirs do not gain any advantage from this card.)
In Phase I Income, collect
2 additional Coins. Also,
when returning this card after
passing, get 1 Victory point
for each of your Dwellings
on the Game board.
AUREN
Ability:
Stronghold: After building the Stronghold, immediately and only once
get 1 Favor tile. Also, take an Action token. As a Special action (once per
Action phase), you may advance 2 spaces on a Cult track of your choice
(or on space 10 if you have a key). Use the Action token to keep track of
using this Special action.
WITCHES
Ability: Get 5 additional Victory points when founding a Town.
Festung: After building the Stronghold, take an Action token. As a Speal
action (once per Action phase), you may build 1 Dwelling on an unoccupied Forest space. Neither pay 1 Worker, nor 2 Coins for this Dwelling. For
this build only, ignore the adjacency rule. You may build on any free Forest
space as long as it has been Forest at the beginning of this Action (Witches
Ride). (Thus, you may not transform a Terrain space beforehand.) Use the
Action token to keep track of using this Special action.
ALCHEMISTS
Ability: You may trade 1 Victory point for 1 Coin, or 2 Coins for
1 Victory Point anytime and any number of times (Sorcerers Stone).
Stronghold: After building the Stronghold, immediately and only once
gain 12 Power. From now on, gain 2 Power for each Spade you get throughout the remainder of the game (regardless of the way you get the Spade).
DARKLINGS
Ability: You need to pay Priests (instead of Workers) when transforming Terrain spaces. Pay 1 Priest and get 2 Victory points for each step of
transformation.
Stronghold: After building the Stronghold, you may immediately and
only once trade up to 3 Workers for 1 Priest each (Ordination of Priests).
HALFLINGS
Ability: Get 1 additional Victory point for each Spade you get throughout the game (regardless of the way you get the Spade).
Stronghold: After building the Stronghold, immediately and only once
get 3 Spades to apply on Terrain spaces following the general rules. You
may build a Dwelling on exactly one of these spaces by paying its costs.
CULTISTS
Ability: Whenever at least one of your opponents decides to take
Power due to your building activity, advance 1 space on a Cult track of
your choice. (You only get to advance 1 space in total regardless of the
number of opponents taking Power. If all of your opponents refuse to take
Power, do not advance on a Cult track.)
Festung: After building the Stronghold, immediately and only once get
7 Victory points.
ENGINEERS
Ability: As an Action, you may build a Bridge for 2 Workers. (You may
take this Action any number of times during a round. You may still build
Bridges via the respective Power action.)
Stronghold: After building the Stronghold, each round when passing,
get 3 Victory points for each Bridge connecting two of your Structures.
DWARVES
Ability: When taking the Transform and Build action, you may skip
one Terrain or River space by paying 2 more Workers (Tunneling). Get
4 Victory points each time when Tunneling. You have no Shipping. In
the final Area scoring, any Structures that can be reached via Tunneling
are considered connected (regardless of the number of your leftover
Workers).
Stronghold: After building the Stronghold, only pay 1 more Worker
instead of 2 when Tunneling.
Appendix VI: The Factions
This section provides further details on the 14 factions, their special abilities, and the rewards for building their Stronghold. The factions are sorted by
Home terrain. Some factions gain an Action token after building their Stronghold. This token may already be used on the same round.
MERMAIDS
Ability: You may skip one River space when founding a Town. (You
decide if and when you want to use this ability. When founding a Town in
this fashion, put the Town tile on the skipped River space. Of course, you
may build Bridges as usual.)
Stronghold: After building the Stronghold, immediately and only once
move forward 1 space on the Shipping track. Neither pay 1 Worker, nor
4 Coins for this movement. (Take the rewards associated with the new level
as indicated on your Faction board.)
SWARMLINGS
Ability: Collect 3 Workers when founding a Town.
Stronghold: After building the Stronghold, take an Action token. As a
Special action (once per Action phase), you may upgrade a Dwelling to a
Trading house. Neither pay Coins, nor Workers for this Trading house. Use
the Action token to keep track of using this Special action.
CHAOS MAGICIANS
Ability: You start the game with only one Dwelling. You may only place
this Dwelling after all the other players have build all of theirs (if necessary, after the Nomads have placed their third one, see setup on page 5).
You get 2 Favor tiles instead of 1 whenever you build a Temple or your
Sanctuary.
Stronghold: After building the Stronghold, take 1 Action token. As a
Special action (once per Action phase), you may take a double-turn. (On
this double-turn, take any 2 Actions one after another  passing is also
considered an Action.) Use the Action token to keep track of using this
Special action.
GIANTS
Ability: You always pay exactly 2 Spades to transform a Terrain space
into your Home terrain  even for Mountains and Desert. (A single Spade
will be forfeit when gained in Phase III as a Cult bonus.)
Stronghold: After building the Stronghold, take an Action token. As
a Special action (once per Action phase), get 2 free Spades to transform a
reachable Terrain space into your Home terrain. On this space, you may
immediately build a Dwelling by paying its costs. Use the Action token to
keep track of using this Special action.
FAKIRS
Ability: When taking the Transform and Build action, you may skip
one Terrain or River space by paying 1 more Priest (Carpet Flight). Get
4 Victory points each time when doing a Carpet Flight. In the final Area
scoring, any Structures that can be reached via Carpet Flight are considered connected (regardless of the number of your leftover Priests).
Stronghold: After building the Stronghold, you may now skip 2 Terrain, or 2 River spaces, or one each when doing a Carpet Flight. (This also
affects the final Area scoring.)
NOMADS
Ability: You start the game with 3 instead of 2 Dwellings. Place the third
one after all players have placed their second ones (but before the Chaos
Magicians have placed their only Dwelling).
Stronghold: After building the Stronghold, take an Action token. As a
Special action (once per Action phase), you may transform a Terrain space
directly adjacent to one of your Structures into your Home terrain (Sandstorm). On this space, you may immediately build a Dwelling by paying
its costs. (This ability is not applicable past a River space or Bridge.) Use
the Action token to keep track of using this Special action. (The Sandstorm
is not considered a Spade.)



GAME NAME:
7 Wonders Duel


RULES:
Antoine Bauza & Bruno Cathala
The beginning does not hint at the end.
Herodotus
Welcome to 7 Wonders Duel!
7 Wonders Duel is a game for 2 players in the world of 7 Wonders, the best-selling boardgame.
It uses some of the main mechanics of its older brother,
but offers a new challenge, especially adapted for one-on-one games.

CONTENTS:
- 1 Game Board
- 23 Age I cards
- 23 Age II cards
- 20 Age III cards
- 7 Guild cards
- 12 Wonder cards
- 4 Military tokens
- 10 Progress tokens
- 1 Conflict pawn
- 31 coins (14 value 1, 10 value 3 and 7 value 6)
- 1 Scorebook
- 1 Rule book
- 1 Helpsheet

OVERVIEW & OBJECT OF THE GAME:
In 7 Wonders Duel, each player is leading a civilization and will construct Buildings
and Wonders. All of the Buildings constructed by a player together with their
Wonders are called a city.
A game plays out over 3 Ages, each Age using one of the 3 decks of cards (first
the cards from Age I, then Age II, and finally Age III). Each Age card represents
a Building.
These Ages are played out in a similar fashion, with each player having the chance
to play approximately 10 cards per Age to earn coins, strengthen their armies,
make scientific discoveries, and develop their city.
In 7 Wonders Duel, there are 3 ways to claim victory: military supremacy, scientific supremacy, and civilian victory.
Military and scientific victories can happen at any time and end the game
immediately. If, by the end of the third Age, no one has yet won the game,
the players add up their victory points, and the player with the highest score is
declared the winner.

GAME ELEMENTS:
Wonder card
Each large card represents a Wonder from the Age of Antiquity. Each Wonder
consists of a name, a construction cost, and an effect.
Military Tokens
The Military tokens represent the benefits a city earns when it manages to gain
the upper hand, militarily, over its opponent.
Progress Tokens
The progress tokens represent effects which you can obtain by collecting identical pairs of scientific symbols.
Conflict Pawn
The Conflict pawn indicates on the board one citys military advantage over
the other.
Board
The board represents the military rivalry between the two cities. It is divided into
zones (9) and spaces (19). The last space on each end represents the players capital.
It also holds the Military tokens and the Progress tokens available for the current game.
Coins
Coins allow you to construct certain Buildings, and to purchase resources through
commerce. The Treasury, the accumulated coins, is worth victory points at the
end of the game.
Name Effect
Progress Tokens
Zones
Start location of the Conflict Pawn
Military Tokens Spaces
Cost
Guild and Age cards
In 7 Wonders Duel, all of the Age and Guild cards represent Buildings. The Building
cards all consist of a name, an effect and a construction cost.
There are 7 different types of Buildings, easily identifiable by their colored border.
- Raw materials (brown cards),
these Buildings produce resources:
- Manufactured goods (grey cards),
these Buildings produce resources:
- Civilian Buildings (blue cards),
these Buildings are worth victory points:
- Scientific Buildings (green cards),
these Buildings allow you to score victory points and grant a scientific
symbol:
- Commercial Buildings (yellow cards),
these Buildings are worth coins, produce resources, change the trading
rules, and are sometimes worth victory points.
- Military Buildings (red cards),
these Buildings increase your military power:
- Guilds (purple cards),
these Buildings allow you to score points based on specific criteria.
Note: The Age III deck contains no Raw materials (brown cards) or Manufactured
goods (grey cards), but it contains the Guild cards (purple cards).
Cost of cards
The area located under the color strip on Age cards indicates the construction
cost. If that area is empty, the Building is free and requires no resources to be
constructed.
Example: the Lumber Yard is free, the Stone Pit costs 1 coin, the Baths require 1
Stone to be built, and the Arena requires 1 Clay, 1 Stone and 1 Wood.
Starting in Age II, some Buildings have both a cost and a free construction condition: if the player has previously constructed the Building indicated via a symbol
in the cost area, the construction is free.
Example: the construction of the Horse Breeders requires 1 Clay and 1 Wood,
OR the possession of the Stable.
Effect
Cost
Name

PREPARATION:
1. Place the board between the two players on one side of the play area.
2. Place the conflict pawn on the neutral space in the middle of the board.
3. Place the 4 Military tokens face up, on their spaces.
4. Shuffle the Progress tokens and place 5 of them randomly, face up, on
the board. Return the rest to the box.
5. Each player takes 7 coins from the Bank.
Wonders Selection Phase
- Choose a first player
- Shuffle the 12 Wonders tiles
- Place 4 random Wonders, face up, between the two players
- The first player chooses 1 Wonder
- The second player chooses 2 Wonders
- The first player takes the remaining Wonder
- Place 4 more Wonders and repeat the selection, but this time, start with
the second player.
Once this step is complete, each player will have 4 Wonders for the game, which
they place in a column, to the left of their play area.
For your first game, ignore the Wonders Selection phase and take
the following Wonders tiles:
Player 1:
- the Pyramids
- the Great Lighthouse
- the Temple of Artemis
- the Statue of Zeus
Player 2:
- Circus Maximus
- Piraeus
- the Appian Way
- the Colossus
One deck per Age
Return to the box, without looking at them, 3 cards from each Age deck.
Then randomly draw 3 Guild cards and add them to the Age III deck without
looking at them. Return the remaining Guilds to the box.

CONSTRUCTING IN 7 WONDERS DUEL:
Throughout the game, you will construct Buildings and Wonders. Most of the
Buildings have a resource cost. Some are free and others have a coin cost. Finally,
some have a resource cost but also a free construction condition. The Wonders
all have a resource cost.
Free Construction
Some cards have no cost and can be put into play for free.
Example: The construction of the Lumber Yard is free.
Resource Cost
Some cards have a resource cost.
To construct them, you must produce the corresponding resources AND/OR buy
them from the bank via the trading rules.
Production
A citys resources are produced by its brown cards, its grey cards, some yellow
cards, and some Wonders.
Example: Antoine produces 1 Stone, 3 Clay, and 1 Papyrus in his city.
If you have in your city all of the resources indicated on the Building, then you
can construct that Building.
Example: Antoine can construct the Baths (1 Stone) or the Garrison (1 Clay) as his
city produces the required resources. However, without trading, he cant build the
Apothecary (1 Glass).
Important: resources arent spent during construction. They can be used
each turn, for the entire game. Unless theres an exception, a citys production is never reduced.
Trading
Often, you will want to construct a Building while youre missing one or more
required resources. In that case, you can always purchase the missing resources
from the bank. The cost of each missing resource varies over the course of the
game. It is calculated as follows:
COST = 2 + number of symbols of the same resources produced by the
brown and grey cards of the opposing city
Clarifications
- Note that the purchasing cost is calculated according to the resources present
in your opponents city, but the purchases are paid to the bank.
- There is no limit to the number of resources you may purchase on your turn.
- The resources produced by yellow cards and by Wonders arent factored into
trading costs.
- Some commercial Buildings (yellow cards) change the trading rules and set the
cost of some resources to 1 coin.
Example: Bruno produces 2 Stones with his Quarry.
- If Antoine wants to purchase one or more stones, he must pay 4
coins for each.
- If Bruno needs a third Stone, he must pay 2 coins, as Antoine
doesnt produce any with his brown cards.
Bruno wants to construct the Fortificaitons, which has the following cost: 2 Stone,
1 Clay and 1 Papyrus. He has in his city 2 Stone. He must therefore purchase the
missing Clay and Papyrus. As his opponent, Antoine, has 1 Clay in his city, but no
Papyrus, Bruno must therefore pay 5 coins to the bank: 3 for the Clay (base 2+1),
and 2 for the Papyrus (base 2+0).
Antoine wants to construct the Aqueduct, which costs 3 Stones. As he produces
none, he must pay 12 coins to the bank. Thats because Bruno produces 2 Stones
with his brown cards, which give a price of 4 coins per Stone (2+2), and Antoine
needs 3.
Cost in coins
Some cards have a cost in coins, which must then be paid to the bank when they
are constructed.
Example: The construction of the Scriptorium costs 2 coins, the construction of the
Stone Pit costs 1 coin.
Cost in coins and in resources
Some cards have a cost in coins and in resources. To build these cards, you must
pay the coin cost to the bank and must either produce the resources, or get
them through trading.
Example: Bruno wants to construct the Caravansery, which costs 2 coins, 1 Glass and
1 Papyrus. Bruno must pay 7 coins in all. 2 coins for the cards cost, 3 coins for the
Glass (Antoine produces 1), 2 coins for the Papyrus (Antoine does not produce any).
Free construction condition (chains)
Some Buildings grant a chain symbol (white).
Some Buildings in Ages II and III contain, under their resource cost, a white symbol
linked to a Building from a previous Age.
If you have the Building containing this symbol in your city, you can construct
the new one for free.
Example:
Antoine has constructed the Baths. During Age II, he
can build the Aqueduct for free as the icon is on
the Baths.
Bruno has constructed the Palisade. During Age III,

GAME OVERVIEW:
A game begins in Age I, continues in Age II, and ends with Age III. In case of a
supremacy victory (either military or scientific), the game ends immediately.
Overview of an Age
Preparation of the structure
At the beginning of each Age, shuffle the corresponding deck, then display the
20 cards according to the structure of the current Age (see Game Aid on the
last page of this rulebook). Be careful, some cards are displayed face up, while
others should be face down.
Game Turn
In 7 Wonders Duel, the players each play in turn.
The first player begins Age I.
On your turn, you must choose an accessible card in the card structure and
play it. An accessible card is a card which isnt partially covered by other cards.
Example: the Baths, the Stone Pit, the Lumber Yard, and the Scriptorium are accessible. The other cards are not accessible at the moment.
You can play the card youve chosen in one of three different ways:
- 1. Construct the Building
- 2. Discard the card to obtain coins
- 3. Construct a Wonder
After having played your card, you must reveal any cards which may have been
hidden and which are now accessible.
Note:
- Some Wonders allow you to play again. You start your new turn after having
revealed the newly accessible cards.
- If a player has a replay effect that would allow them to take another turn at the
end of an Age (when the structure is empty), the effect is lost.
1. Construct a Building
To construct a Building, you pay the cost of the Building and place it in front of
yourself. This Building now belongs to your city.
As the game progresses, sort your Buildings by color in order to help you read
your city.
2. Discard to obtain coins
You discard the card and take 2 coins + 1 coin per yellow card in your city from
the bank. The money is added to your citys treasury.
The discarded cards are placed face-down next to the board. Players are free to
consult the discard pile at any point.
Example: Bruno discards the Aqueduct. He earns 4 coins as he has in his city the
Tavern and the Clay Reserve.
11
3. Construct a Wonder
You pay the cost of the Wonder (not the one of the Age card), then place your Age
card face down partially covered by the Wonder card which is being constructed.
The used card has no effect, it is simply used to show that the Wonder has been built.
Example: Antoine takes an accessible card of his choice to construct the Colossus,
which costs 3 Clay and 1 Glass. After having paid the cost of the Colossus (not the
cards), he slips it, face down, under the right-side of the Colossus and moves the
Conflict pawn 2 spaces.
7 Wonders, not one more!
Only 7 Wonders may be built over the course of the game. As soon as either
player constructs the games 7th Wonder, the last Wonder, which has not yet
been built, is immediately returned to the box.
Example: Antoine has just constructed the Colossus. 7 Wonders have been built during the game (4 by Bruno, 3 by Antoine). Antoine returns the Pyramids to the box.
END OF AN AGE
An Age ends when all 20 cards from the structure have been played.
Prepare the next Ages structure.
The player with the weakest military chooses which player begins the next Age.
A player has a weaker military if the Conflict pawn is on their side of the board.
In a situation where the pawn is in the middle of the board, the player who begins
the next Age is the last active player (meaning whoever played the last card of
the previous Age).

MILITARY:
Each shield represented on the military Buildings (red cards) or Wonders allows
its owner to immediately move the Conflict pawn one space in the direction of
the opposing capital. The Conflict pawn is therefore likely to move back and
forth on the track.
When the Conflict pawn enters a zone (defined by dotted lines), the active
player applies the effect of the corresponding token, then returns it to the box.
Example: Antoine constructs the Archery Range, a military Building which has
2 Shields. He immediately moves the Conflict pawn two spaces towards the opposing
capital. As he enters in a new zone, he applies the Military token, Bruno discards
2 coins, and then the token is returned to the box.
Military Supremacy
If the Conflict pawn enters the space of your opponents capital, you immediately
win the game via military supremacy.

SCIENCE & PROGRESS:
There are 7 different scientific symbols in the game.
Each time you gather a pair of identical scientific symbols, you may immediately
choose one of the Progress tokens on the game board. That token will be kept
in your city until the end of the game.
Clarification: the scientific symbols are found on the scientific Buildings (green
cards) and on a Progress token.
Scientific Supremacy
If you gather 6 different scientific symbols, you immediately win the game.

END OF GAME AND VICTORY:
A game ends immediately in the case of a military supremacy, a scientific supremacy, or at the end of Age III.
Civilian Victory
If no player has won a victory through supremacy before the end of Age III, the
player who has the most victory points wins the game.
To determine your total, add:
- Your military victory points (0, 2, 5, or 10 depending on the position of
the Conflict pawn).
- Victory points from your Buildings (blue,green,yellow, and purple
cards).
- Victory points from your Wonders.
- Your victory points from Progress.
- Your citys treasury: each complete set of 3 coins is worth 1 point.
In the case where both players are tied, the player who has the most victory
points from their Civilian Buildings (blue cards) wins the game. If this is also a
tie, then both players share their victory.
Note: a scorebook is present in the box to help you total your points, or keep a
record of your memorable games!

CREDITS:
Authors: Antoine Bauza and Bruno Cathala
Artwork: Miguel Coimbra
Development: The Sombrero-wearing Belgians
aka Cdrick Caumont & Thomas Provoost
Rules revision: Ann Pichot
English translation: Eric Harlaux
English revision: Eric Franklin
Text correction: Laure Valentin
Production director: Guillaume Pilon
Art director: Alexis Vanmeerbeeck
Layout: Cdric Chevalier, ric Azagury, Justine Lottin
Thanks:
The authors would like to thank all of the testers of 7 Wonders Duel who have allowed the game
to progress and evolve. A more specific thanks to Julien from Orange and to all the players who
dropped by La Cafetire!
Repos Production would like to thank Roy Free Music, Jean-Loup who squeaks, Christophe
All I need, Jeff Peated, his personal Mentat Dimitri Perrier and Anne-Cath,
Sven, Efp and the Efp Boys, Brigitte, Tibi, Papy and Mamy Tricky, Dets
and Martine, Jean-Yves Fabiola, Hlne and Tanguy, the Cyborg.
7 Wonders Duel is a Repos Production game, published by
Sombreros Production.
Phone: +32 471954132
rue des Comdiens, 22
1000 Brussels - Belgium
www.rprod.com
(C) Sombreros production 2015.
All rights reserved.
The contents of this game can only
be used for purposes of private
entertainment.

ORGANIZATION OF THE CARD BOARD DEPENDING ON THE AGE:
At the beginning of each Age, shuffle the corresponding deck, then lay out the 20 cards according to the structure of the current Age.
Be careful, some cards are laid out face up, and others face down.
To make things easier, start at the indicated point.
Age I Age II
Age III



GAME NAME:
Viticulture Essential Edition

Stonemaier Games Presents
designed by Jamey Stegmaier, Alan Stone, & Morten Monrad Pedersen
illustrated by Beth Sobel
Essential Edition
Old-world Tuscany awaits your winemaking skill and strategic cunning.
Youll plant vines, harvest grapes, age wines, and fill merchant orders to create the greatest winery in Italy!
Object of the Game
Players allocate workers and play visitors to complete various
tasks throughout the seasons (each worker is placed on one
action each year). In the spring, players decide the schedule
their workers will follow. An early rise gives the player the
chance to act first; however, offering workers a later wakeup time gives you more valuable bonuses. In the summer,
players place workers on action spaces to plant vines and
build structures that help advance that players vineyard. In
the fall, players invite visitors to help their workers. In the
winter, players place workers on action spaces to harvest
grapes, make wine, and fill orders.

GOAL:
The goal is to reach 20 victory points, with victory points
representing your reputation as a vineyard owner. When
a player reaches 20 points, the current year will be played
through the year end, and the player with the most points
wins. Players may exceed the 20-point goal and there is no
point limit. In the case of a tie, tiebreakers are (in order):
1. Most lira
2. Total value of wine in the cellar
3. Total value of grapes on the crush pad
Viticulture is a worker-placement strategy game. The Essential Edition includes
the second edition of Viticulture along with several elements from the
original Tuscany expansion pack, hand-picked by famed designer Uwe Rosenberg.
Have a question while playing? Tweet it to @stonemaiergames with the hashtag #viticulture and well help.
Replacement parts are available for free upon request at stonemaiergames.com/replacement-parts.
- Cards (232 total)
- 42 vine cards (green deck)
- 36 wine order cards (purple deck)
- 38 summer visitor cards (yellow deck)
- 38 winter visitor cards (blue deck)
- 18 field cards (large size; field on front & back)
- 24 Automa cards (large size; beige back)
- 36 mama and papa cards (large size; pink & blue deck)

BOARDS:
- 1 game board
- 6 vineyard mats

COMPONENTS:

PIECES:
- 30 worker meeples in 6 different colors and 1 gray temporary worker
- 6 grande worker meeples
- 50 grape and wine tokens (glass)
- 6 wake-up tokens (roosters)
- 6 victory point tokens (corks)
- 6 residual payment tracker tokens (wine bottles)
- 48 wooden structure tokens (8 unique tokens for each color)
- 72 punch board lira coins (52 bronze 1 coins, 12 silver 2 coins, 8 gold 5 coins)
- 1 first-player token (grapes)

RULE BOOK & QUICK-REFERENCE GUIDE:
Game Board Setup
Each player places their
rooster token above the
wake-up chart and their cork
token on the start space on
the victory point track. Each
player should also place
their wine bottle token on
the middle of the Residual
Payment Tracker.
Note 1: There are negative
numbers on the victory
point track for a few of the
summer and winter visitor
cards. A player may not go
lower than -5 on the victory
point track. If a player has
-5 victory points, he may
not use a visitor card that
requires losing more points.
Note 2: The following is
public information and
cannot be concealed: a
players vineyard mat,
available workers, amount
of lira, and number and
type of cards.

TERMINOLOGY:
Throughout this rulebook, you will
notice the terms value and price.
Value refers to a grapes worth
when being turned into wine and
the worth of a wine when filling
an order.
Price refers to the amount of
money a grape will bring when
sold. In Viticulture, grapes can
be sold for immediate payments,
while wine is sold via wine
orders in exchange for victory
points and residual payments.

SETUP:
Vineyard Mat: Each player receives a
vineyard mat and 3 different field cards:
Place them side by
side (field side up) on the vineyard
mat. Shuffle the 4 decks of small cards
(green, yellow, purple, and blue) and
place them on the board.
Deck Maintenance: If any of the
four decks are exhausted during
play, immediately shuffle the discard
pile and replace the deck. If the
deck has been exhausted but no
cards have been discarded, that
deck is unavailable until more cards
are discarded.
First Player: Take all of the rooster
tokens that have been claimed by
players, shake them up in your hand, and
randomly pick one. The player with that
color is the first player and gets the first
player token.
You are dealt the following mama & papa cards:
Thus you will begin the game with 2 regular workers, 1 vine card, 1 summer
visitor card, 1 wine order card, , 1 grande worker, and either a windmill or
an additional
Mamas and Papas: After randomly
selecting the first player, shuffle the mama
and papa cards and deal one face-up
to each player. Each player's starting
resources are determined by their mama
and papa cards.
Advanced Variant: Some groups
might prefer to let each player draw
2 mamas and 2 papas, then choose
1 of each.
Every mama comes with 2 regular
workers. Draw cards as indicated on
your mama card to form your opening
hand. Do this before gaining resources
from your papa card.
Every papa card comes with 1 grande
worker, and most come with a certain
amount of lira. Papa cards also give you
a choice: start with a specific structure
or gain a few extra lira. Players make
this choice in clockwise order starting
with the first player. Several papas offer
an extra regular worker or a victory point
instead of a structure.
After all starting resources are
accounted for, discard the mama and
papa cards. They are only used while
setting up the game.
Example: Player 1, the player with the
first-player token, chooses the 6 slot
and gains a point on the victory point
track. Player 2 chooses the 4 row and
gains . So, even though Player 1
has the first-player token, for the rest
of the year Player 2 will go first and
Player 1 will go second based on where
each player placed their rooster on the
wake-up chart.
Time 1: No bonus
Time 2: Draw 1 vine card
Time 3: Draw 1 wine order card
Time 4: Gain
Time 5: Draw either a summer or winter visitor card
Time 6: Gain 1 victory point
Time 7: Gain the temporary worker for the year
(acts as any regular worker)

SPRING ACTIONS:
Wake-up chart: Starting with the player holding the first-player token and moving clockwise, each player places his/her
rooster on an unoccupied wake-up row. The number represents how early that player wants his/her workers to wake up in
the coming year. 1 is the earliest time and 7 is the latest. For workers, the later the better; for the vineyard owner, perhaps not.
Helpful Tip: When a player passes during the summer, he will slide his rooster
from the left to the right on the wake-up chart for a clear visual of the players that
remain active. Then as players pass during the winter, they will slide their roosters
back to the left. This will help players see who has yet to pass in the summer
and winter.
Note: The first player to act in the
summer, fall, and winter reverts back to
the wake-up chart order from the spring
of that year. Thus, in the example,
above, even if Player 2 (row 4 on the
wake-up chart) is the last player to
act in the summer, he will be the first
player to act in the fall, and then again
in the winter.
Spring
Starting with the player who has the first player token and
proceeding clockwise, each player will place their rooster on
an open row of the wake-up chart to determine player order
for the rest of the year.
Summer
Starting with the top player on the wake-up chart and proceeding
down the chart, each player will either place 1 worker on any
available action space in the summer (yellow action spaces) and
then immediately take that action, or that player may choose to
save their remaining workers for the winter by passing. This cycle
of turns continues until all players have passed.
Fall
Starting with the top player on the wake-up chart and
proceeding down the chart, each player will draw either a
summer or winter visitor card.
Winter
Starting with the top player on the wake-up chart and
proceeding down the chart, each player will place 1 worker
on any available action space in the winter (blue action
spaces) and then immediately take that action. This cycle
of turns continues until all players have played all of their
workers.
Year End
Players age their grape and wine tokens, return workers to their
vineyard mats, collect residual payments, remove rooster tokens
from the wake-up chart, and rotate the first-player token counterclockwise. When any player reaches or exceeds 20 victory points,
the game will finish at the end of the current year.
Bonuses: Most actions have one
action space with a special bonus.
A player may take the bonus when
placing a worker on an action space
with an icon on
it. A player may take the action and
the bonus in any order. The action is
mandatory and the bonus is optional.
For example, a player cannot place a
worker on the Fill 1 wine order bonus
space to gain 1 without also filling a
wine order.
Scaling the Game Based on Number of Players
In the 2-player game, only the left
action space is available; for the 3 - 4
player game the left and middle action
spaces are available; and for the 5 - 6
player game all three action spaces are
available. These action spaces may be
claimed in any order. Each action space
can be occupied by only one worker.

GRANDE WORKER PLACEMENT
The grande worker follows the rules for
regular workers but also has a special
ability: The grande worker may be placed
on a fully occupied action on the board
to perform that action. Multiple
players may place their
grande workers in this
way. A grande worker
placed on a bonus
action space will give
you the bonus (just
like a regular worker);
otherwise it does not
give you a bonus.
Worker Placement
* A player may use each worker only once a year. Thus a worker
placed in the summer cannot be used in the winter.
* A player may place 1 worker per turn.
* In a 3-6 player game, multiple spaces are available for each action. The
worker you place may go on any unoccupied space, even if there are other
workers (yours or opponents) on other spaces on the same action.
* Workers may only be placed on the current seasons action spaces.
* If a player passes, he may place no more workers that season.
* A player must take the action when placing a worker. For example, if a player
chooses the "Plant " action, that player must plant a vine.
worker on a summer action space
Example: You are playing a 2-player
game and the other player chooses
to give a tour with regular worker to
gain 2 lira. If you really need to give a
tour, you may then place your grande
worker on that action (on the
art for that action, not an
action space) to gain 2 lira
as well.
Summer Actions
Summertime in the game is the time to build your vineyard, go to market, plant
vines, put your summer visitors to work, show off your vineyard, and sell grapes.
Gain : In the summer or winter, a player may place
a worker on the cart at the bottom of the board to
gain . Placing 1 worker here counts as a player's turn.
Any number of workers may be placed on this action over
the course of the year by any number of players.
Vine Deck Varieties and Values
Each vine card has a circle with a number representing the value of grape the vine will yield. Some cards have structures in
the upper-left corner (irrigation, trellis, or both). The depicted structures must be built before the vine can be planted.
Uproot: Some visitor cards and the Yoke action give
players the option to uproot a vine card. To do so, a player
selects a planted vine card from their field and returns it to
their hand. This action is rarely used; its there as a backup
in case a player needs to reconfigure their fields.
Variety Color Value Total Cards Prerequisite
Sangiovese Red 1 4 None
Malvasia White 1 4 None
Pinot Red & White 1 each 6 Trellis
Syrah Red 2 5 Trellis
Trebbiano White 2 5 Trellis
Merlot Red 3 5 Irrigation
Sauvignon Blanc White 3 5 Irrigation
Cabernet Sauvignon Red 4 4 Trellis & Irrigation
Chardonnay White 4 4 Trellis & Irrigation
sell at least one grape or
buy/sell one field: Sell any
number of grape tokens (at
least 1) from your crush pad for
the price indicated by the coin
between the crush pads. For
example, a 4-value grape token
is priced at when sold.
Discard the tokens you sell.
Draw One Vine Card:
Draw one vine card.
Bonus: Draw an
additional vine card.
Build One Structure:
Build one unbuilt structure
on your vineyard mat by
paying the cost and placing
the corresponding structure
token on your vineyard
mat. (See page 12 for an
explanation of each structure.)
Play One Summer Visitor Card: Play a summer
visitor card from your hand to resolve its effect. Place
resolved cards on the summer visitor discard pile at
the top of the board.
Bonus: Play an additional summer visitor card.
Plant One Vine: Plant a vine on one of the fields in your vineyard. Vines are
planted by placing a vine card on an empty field, or stacking a vine card on top
of another vine that has already has been planted. Once a vine is planted, it stays
on the field for the rest of the game, including when the field is harvested. The
only way to remove a vine card is to use the Yoke or a visitor card to uproot it.
Bonus: Plant an additional vine card from your hand.
Prices for each tier of
grape tokens
Alternatively, you can sell
one of your fields for the lira
amount indicated on the field
card or buy back one of your
sold fields (same cost as the
sale price).
You may not sell a field if it
has vine cards on it, nor may
you plant vines on sold fields.
Note: A field cannot exceed its max value (5, 6, or 7) when adding the value of
the cards on the field together.This field currently has a total value of 5.
Several visitors refer to a bonus you get for
structures of specific costs. The bonus only
applies to structures with that exact cost.
For example, the Blacksmith gives you 1
for building a windmill, tasting room, or
large cellar.
Several visitors let you pay to place a 1-value
grape on your crush pad. This is not a grape
harvested from your vinesrather, it is
as if you are buying grapes directly from a
market. A 1-value grape slot on your crush
pad must be open to use this ability.
When a player plays a summer or winter visitor card, the
action described on the card is taken immediately and the
card is discarded, ending any bonuses granted by that card.
Visitor cards are played by placing a worker on the play
summer/winter visitor card action spaces. No additional
worker is required to take the action described on the card.
You may only play a visitor card if you are able to fully resolve
the effect on the card. For example, if a card says that you
must give all opponents each to gain a benefit, you can
only play that card if you have enough lira to pay to all
other players. Multiple actions on visitor cards may be taken
in any order.
Upgrading the Cellar: Several cards let you upgrade
your cellar to the next level. That means you may build
either a medium or large cellar, depending on what you
already have (you may not build a large cellar if you dont
have a medium cellar).
One Way Conversions: Some cards allow you to
trade lira for victory points (or vice versa) at a specific ratio.
For example, means that you can gain victory
points at a rate of for every you spend.
See page 11 for additional details on specific visitor cards.
Example
Many visitors have
two separate clauses
delineated by the allcaps word OR. These
are two completely
independent clauses. In
the example above, you
choose to either (1) age
all wine in your cellar
twice OR (2) lose 1 to
upgrade your cellar to the next level.
The rules for training a new worker apply to all
visitor cards--unless the card says otherwise,
you cant use the worker until the following year.
The icon on visitor cards reads
any worker.
Summer and Winter Visitor Cards
Cultivator Plant 1 . You
may plant it on a field even if the
total value of that field exceeds
the max vine value. This is a
one-time exception to the rules
about planting on fields up to a
certain vine value. That is, you
may not continue to plant on
that field in excess of the max
vine value on future turns.
Manager Take any action (no
bonus) from a previous season
without placing a worker. Any
action on the board from
those seasons are available,
even if all action spaces
are full. In base Viticulture
(without the extended board
from Tuscany), this card refers
only to the summer season.
Motivator All players may
retrieve their grande workers.
Gain 1 for each opponent
who does this. Opponents
who have already passed their
turn for the season are not
eligible to retrieve their grande
workers.
Organizer Move your to
an empty row on the wake-up
chart, take the bonus, then pass
to the next season. When you
pass using the Organizer, your
rooster will stay in the new
wake-up order you selected.
On the extended board in
Tuscany, you may choose the
first row of the wake-up track
(if it's unoccupied).
Planner Place a worker on an action in a future
season. Take the action at the beginning of that
season. Thus, if you place a worker on the fill 1
wine order action, you take that action before
players take winter actions as normal in wakeup order. For example, if you are first in wake-up
order, you would take the Planner action and
then take your turn. This card only applies to
action spaces on the board. In base Viticulture
(without the extended board from Tuscany),
this card refers only to the winter season.
Producer Pay to retrieve up to 2
from other actions. They may be used
again this year. Other actions refers to
any action other than the play 1 summer
visitor action where you played the
Producer. Retrieving those workers may
open up action spaces in the summer for
you and other players to use.
Sharecropper Plant 1 even without the
required structure(s) OR uproot and discard
1 to gain . This card lets you bypass
the normal cost for planting vine cards
you dont need a trellis or irrigation to plant
with the Sharecroppers first ability. You
may discard any 1 vine card from hand
it's not restricted to the vine card you
uprooted.
Zymologist Make up to 2 of value
4 or greater, even if you haven't upgraded
your cellar. Thus, if you use this card to
make a 5-value red token, you may place
it on the 5-value space even if you dont
have the medium cellar. For that token to
age past the 6-value, you need to build
both a medium cellar and a large cellar.
(You cannot build a large cellar without a
medium cellar.)

EXAMPLES & CLARIFICATIONS:
Yoke: Owning a yoke
gives a player an action space that they
can use once per year in any season
(summer or winter). On their turn, a
player may place a regular worker (or
a grande worker acting as a regular
worker) on their yoke to uproot 1 vine
card (return a vine card from their field
to their hand) or harvest 1 field (even in
the summer, though the field may only
be harvested once per year. More details
about harvesting are on page 14).
Cellars ( and ): Players
store wine in their cellars,
but a small cellar affords only
enough room for lesser value
varieties. Building medium (4 - 6 value
wine) and large (7 - 9 value wine)
allows players to store higher value
wines, as well as create and store blush
wines in the medium and large cellars
and sparkling wines in the large cellar.
Note: The medium cellar must be built
before a player builds the large cellar.
Trellis ( ): A trellis is
required to plant certain types
of vines.
Irrigation ( ): Irrigation is
required to plant certain types
of vines.
Windmill ( ): After a
player builds a windmill, he
collects 1 victory point whenever he
plants a vine (max 1 per year).
Tasting Room ( ): After a
player builds a tasting room,
they collect 1 victory point whenever
they place a worker on the "give a
vineyard tour" action if they have at
least 1 wine token in their cellar.
(max 1 per year).
Fall is a time to invite helpful visitors to
your vineyard. These visitors will arrive
in the summer or the winter to provide a
helpful hand on your vineyard.
In wake-up order, without placing a
worker, each player draws a summer or
winter visitor card. Do not play this card
(you may only play visitor cards on the
corresponding actions in the summer
and winter).
Any player with a cottage may draw
a summer or winter visitor card in
addition to the first visitor card they
drew in the fall.
Fall Actions
Cottage ( ):If a player has a
cottage, they will draw a visitor
card of their choice at the beginning of
the fall season (in addition to the visitor
card drawn by default in the fall). The
two cards drawn may be of the same
type or different types of visitor cards.
Structures
Structures allow you to plant higher quality vines, make better wine, and gain special bonuses
in the summer and fall. Each structure has a cost indicated by a coin on the player mat.
Harvest One Field:
Choose one field and
add grape tokens to the
crush pad based on that
fields yield (see page 14
for details). Vine cards
remain on the field when
harvesting--viticulturists
do not remove vines
from the ground when
they pick grapes.
Bonus: Harvest an
additional field.
Gain : Gain . This
action space is not limited
to 1 worker.
Draw One Wine Order
Card: Draw one wine
order card.
Bonus: Draw an
additional wine order card.
Make Up to Two Wine
Tokens: Turn grapes on the
crush pad into wine (see
page 14 and 15 for more
details).
Bonus: Make 1 extra
wine token.
Play One Winter Visitor
Card: Play a winter visitor
card from your hand to
resolve its effect. Place
resolved cards on the winter
visitor discard pile at the top
of the board.
Bonus: Play an additional
winter visitor card.
Fill One Wine Order: Fulfill
the criteria on a wine order
card in your hand and then
discard it.
Winter Actions
Winter is the time to reap what you have sown, turn grapes into wine, find out which wines
are in demand, train new workers, put winter visitors to work, and fill wine orders.
Harvest Field
Wine Order
Draw Wine Order Card
Make Wine Tokens
Train
A Worker
Gain
Play Visitor
Card
Pay to Train a New
Worker: Place a new
worker near this action
space to show that it is now
trained but cannot be used
until the following year.
Bonus: Gain .
Note 1: A player may have no more
than 5 workers and 1 grande worker.
This limit does not include the
temporary worker.
When a player harvests a field, they
collect grape tokens from the vine cards
on that field.
To harvest a field, add the total value of all
red grape icons on the vine to create 1 red
grape token and then add the total value
of all white grape icons on the vine to
create 1 white grape token on your crush
pad. The vine cards remain on the field.
Note 1: Each field can only be harvested
once per year.
Note 2: Each grape icon on the crush
pad can fit exactly 1 grape token. If the
grape icon already has a token on it when
you harvest a grape at that value, you
must devalue the grape token to the next
available lowest icon. Thus if the 4-value
white grape icon on your crush pad already
has a token on it when you harvest a field
yielding a 4-value white grape, the new
token would instead go on the 3-value
white icon on the crush pad (if its empty;
otherwise to the 2-value icon, etc).
Example: A player has three vines planted
on one field. When she harvests this field,
she adds the value of the two red-grape
symbols (1 + 1) on the vines to form a single
grape on her crush pad worth 2, and then
the same for the two white-grape symbols
(1 + 2) to form a white grape worth 3.
Note 1: Discard excess tokens used to
create blush or sparkling wine.
Note 2: Players must build the
appropriate cellar to house any wines,
blushes, or sparkling wines above a
value of 3 and 6.
Note 3: Each wine icon on the cellar
can fit exactly 1 wine token. This follows
the same rules as explained in Note 2
on page 14.
Note 4: Once in the cellar, wine tokens
may never be combined.
Note 5: A savvy player will make wine
strategically based on the cellars he
owns and the wine orders in his hand.
Grapes in Viticulture age just like wine!
Example 1: A player decides to make 2 red wine tokens, but he doesnt have the
medium cellar yet. The 1-value red grape becomes a 1-value red wine, and the
4-value red grape is devalued to become a 3-value red wine.
Example 2: The player decides to make a blush wine token, so he combines a red
and a white grape to form a single blush wine token equal to their cumulative
value. He can only do this because he owns a medium cellar.
Make Up to 2 Wine Tokens: Players
make wine by converting grapes on
their crush pads into wine tokens.
Low-value red and white wine tokens
can be created when a player owns
only a small cellar, but the cellar must
be upgraded to create blush wine,
sparkling wine, and higher-value red
and white wine.
When a player makes more than 1 wine
token, the wine he makes may be the
same type of wine or different types.
Red Wine: Move 1 red grape token
to the corresponding space on the
cellar. For example, a 3-value red grape
becomes a 3-value red wine.
White Wine: Move 1 white grape
token to the corresponding space on
the cellar.
Blush: Combine 1 red grape token
and 1 white grape token to make
1 blush wine token equal to the
combined values of the grapes. For
example, a 1-value white grape plus
a 4-value red grape creates a 5-value
blush wine.
Sparkling: Combine 2 red grape
tokens and 1 white grape token to make
1 sparkling wine token equal to the
grape value (example 2).
Making Wine
Example: Filling a Wine Order
This wine order card requires a red wine token worth at least 2 and a white wine worth at least 4. To fill this order, the player
reveals the wine order card, removes exactly one red wine token worth at least 2 and exactly one white wine token worth at least
4 from his cellar, gains 3 points on the victory point track, and moves up on the residual payment tracker. The player then
discards the wine order card.
Wine order for a
2-value red wine and
a 4-value white wine.
victory points earned
residual payment
Residual Payments
Players keep track of residual payments from wine orders on the residual payment
tracker. All players begin the game with their wine bottle tokens on the lira symbol
in the middle of the residual payment tracker.
When a player fills a wine order, that player moves his residual token up on
the track based on the lira amount on the wine order card. It remains in that
position--do not reset it.
At the end of each year, each player gains lira equal to their position on the residual
payment tracker.
The highest residual payment a player can receive is . If they fill additional wine
orders, the residual token remains on 5.
To fill a wine order, place a worker on the fill one wine order action. There are
also some visitor cards that enable you to fill a wine order.
Select and reveal a wine order card from your hand. The card shows one or more
wine token icons with numbers in them. These are the minimum values of the
wine tokens you must discard from your cellar to fill this wine order.
After removing those wine tokens from your vineyard mat, gain victory points and
a residual lira benefit as indicated at the bottom of the card (move your token on
the residual payment tracker), then discard the wine order card.
Filling Wine Orders
Residual Payment Tracker
Age Grape and Wine Tokens:
Increase the value of all grape and
wine tokens on your crush pad and in
your cellar by 1 (i.e., a grape or wine
token valued at 2 would move to 3
and a 3 would move to a 4). Wine and
grape tokens may not have a value
higher than 9.
Note 1: Wine tokens can only be aged
past the value of 3 if the medium cellar
has been built and past 6 if the large
cellar has been built.
Note 2: Players do not lose wine or
grape tokens if they cannot age them.
For example, if a player owns a medium
and a large cellar and has red wine
tokens valued at 8 and 9, when it comes
time to age those tokens, they remain in
the same position.
Return Workers: Return all workers
to their respective players, and return the
temporary worker to the wake-up chart.
Collect Residual Payments for
All Orders Filled: Players collect lira
based on their position on the Residual
Payment Tracker (max per year).
Discard Down to 7 Cards: At
the end of each year, players must
discard their hands down to 7 cards of
their choice.
Rotate First-player Token: Rotate
the first player counter-clockwise and
remove all rooster tokens from the
wake-up chart.
Note: The new first player is merely
the first player to select his worker
placement order on the wake-up chart
in the spring.
Year End
At the end of each year, players age grape and wine tokens, remove all workers from the board,
collect any residual payments earned from filling orders, and rotate the first-player token
counter-clockwise to the next player.
Friendly Variant
An optional rule for a more casual game of Viticulture
is that a player may only choose a bonus action space
if he completes that bonus (i.e., play a second summer
visitor card) or if there is no other available space on that
action. Thus players may not place workers on bonus
action spaces to block other players as they can do in the
standard rules for 3-6 players.
End Game Goal and Tiebreakers
When any player reaches or exceeds 20 victory points, the game
will finish at the end of the current year (after year-end steps).
The player with the most points wins. In the case of a tie,
tiebreakers are (in order):
1. Most lira
2. Total value of wine in the cellar
3. Total value of grapes on the crush pad
Example: : Aging grape and wine tokens with a medium cellar.



GAME NAME:
Food Chain Magnate

Dont cook tonight, play Splotters delight
Splotter
RULES:
Lemonade? They want lemonade? What is the world coming to?
I want commercials for burgers on all channels, every 15 minutes. We
are the Home of the Original Burger, not a hippie health haven. And
place a billboard next to that new house on the corner. I want them
craving beer every second they sit in their posh new garden. The new
management trainee trembles in front of the CEO and tries to politely
point out that... How do you mean, we dont have enough staff ? The
HR director reports to you. Hire more people! Train them! But whatever
you do, dont pay them any real wages. I did not go into business
to become poor. And fire that discount manager, she is only costing me
money. From now on, well sell gourmet burgers. Same crap, double the
price. Get my marketing director in here!
Food Chain Magnate is a heavy strategy game about building a fast
food chain. The focus is on building your company using a card-driven
(human) resource management system. Players compete on a variable
city map through purchasing, marketing and sales, and on a job market
for key staff members. The game can be played by 2-5 serious gamers
in 2-4 hours.
DESIGNED BY:
Game design: Jeroen Doumen, Joris Wiersinga
Graphic design: Ynze Moedt, Iris de Haan
Rule translations: Birgit Hugk, Torsten Hintz
Published by: Splotter Spellen, Th e Netherlands, info@splotter.nl,
http://www.splotter.nl
Playtesting by: Dan Blum, Eric Brosius, Ed Bryan, Nora Ghaoui,
James Hayward, Gil Hova, Trisha Huang, Wei-Hwa Huang, Joe Huber,
Larry Levy, Ian Mackey, Roel van Meerendonk, Mirjam Molenkamp,
Douwe Mulder, Gerard Mulder, Kent Neumann, Steff an OSullivan,
Joe Rushanan, Alan Stern, Tucker Taylor, Bartel van der Veek, Henriette
Verburg, Roel Vinkenvleugel, Stefan Wegner, Arthur Zonnenberg.
Apologies if you are not on the list, or if we spelled your name wrong!
Special thanks to Ragnar Krempel and Bianca van Duijl who playtested
the game multiple times a day on many, many Sundays for almost three
years. Without them, this game would not exist.

COMPONENTS:
- 1 game box
- 1 rulebook
- 5 German player menus
- 5 English player menus
- 1 turn order track
- 20 map tiles
- 8 house tiles
- 8 garden tiles
- 16 marketing tiles: 6 billboards, 4 mailboxes, 3 airplanes and 3 radios
- 16 numbered busy chips
- 3 restaurants for each player
- 1 turn order marker for each player

CONCEPTS:
Employee cards: these cards depict a person. The text under the picture
describes what that person can do in the company. Cards with a in
the top left can be hired by recruiters. Cards that show a require
a salary. Cards that can be trained show future career options in the
bottom left . Some cards instead show a in the bottom left. These are
top positions. Each player may only own one of that particular card. On
the top right, some cards show range, counted by road or zeppelin.
Employee cards can be managers, marketeers, kitchen staff, and many
other things.
Open slot: a position in the company structure where an employee
card could have been played.
Range: the number of times you cross onto a different tile. Range is
normally tracked following a road, unless the card has a zeppelin symbol
Restaurant: Each player has three restaurants available. Each restaurant
is 2x2 squares big. One of these squares is marked as its entrance
by the doors in the corner. If you need to count range from a restaurant,
always start counting from its entrance.
Map tile: a map element that can be picked up. It consists of 5x5 squares.
Initially, a square can contain a road, drinks, part of a house, or empty space.
Food and drinks: The wooden pieces symbolize food (burgers and pizzas)
and drinks (soft drinks, lemonade, and beer). Placed on a house,
they show demand. Placed on a marketing campaign, they show what
is being advertised and for how long. In the hands of a player, they represent
their stock. Drinks are also printed on the map. These indicate
locations where buyers can get these type of drinks.
OVERVIEW:
Each player starts as a single entrepreneur and builds up a fast food
chain. They do this by hiring and training staff, represented by cards;
and by running the operations of their company, which is done on a
variable board. The game continues until the bank runs out of money
(twice). The richest player then wins.
The game is played in phases. Some phases are played simultaneously;
others use a turn order.
INTRODUCING THE GAME:
PIZZA CHEF
Produce 8 pizzas
DISCOUNT MANAGER
Price - $3 Place airplane or lower,
max duration 4
+ $5 for every burger sold
First burger
marketed
$15 discount on salaries
First to train someone
Price -$1
First to
lower prices
+$100
+$200
RESERVE
+$300
RESERVE
YOU
CEO
Hire 1 person
- 222 employee cards
- 84 milestone cards
- 18 bank reserve cards
- 6 CEO cards Bills of paper money
- 40 pizzas (wood) 40 burgers (wood)
- 40 soft drinks (wood) 40 beers (wood) 40 lemonade (wood)
Cards setup
Lay out the employee and milestone cards according to the
image to the right.
If you lay out the cards as pictured, you will have an overview of
upgrade paths and you can easily see which cards are in danger
of running out.
For each employee card marked with , remove a number of
cards so that you end up with the following number:
First airplane
campaign
Count +2 open slots
when determining
order of play
First to train
someone
$15 discount on
salaries
First burger
marketed
+ $5 for every
burger sold
First burger
produced
+1 burger cook
First drink
marketed
+ $5 for every
drink sold
First pizza
marketed
+ $5 for every
pizza sold
First pizza
produced
+1 pizza cook
First billboard
placed
No salaries for
marketeers;
Eternal marketing
First to hire 3
people in 1 turn
+ 2 Management
Trainees
First errand
boy played
All buyers get + 1
drink from each
source
First radio
campaign
Your radios market
2 goods per turn
instead of 1
First cart
operator played
Buyers get range +1
First to
lower prices
Price -$1
First to throw
away drink/food
Get a freezer that
stores 10 items
(drink or food)
First to have $100
Your CEO counts as
CFO (+50% to cash
earned) May not
have a CFO.
First to have $20
May see bank
reserve cards
First waitress
played
Each waitress +$2
First to pay $20 or
more in salaries
May use multiple
trainers on the
same person
Map setup
Create a map by randomly selecting map tiles. Rotate
each tile randomly before placing it in a grid. The number
of map tiles used depends on the number of players,
as shown in the table above and the image to the right.
Setting up
2 players
4 players
3 players
5 players
players employee
cards used
Billboards
removed
Map size
Put the billboards listed in the above table back in the box.
WAITRESS
PRICING
MANAGER
RECRUITING
MANAGER
LUXURIES
MANAGER
JUNIOR
VICE PRESIDENT
Get $3 cash.
Win ties against
restaurant with
fewer waitresses
Price -$1
Hire 1 person
or $5 less salary
TRAINER
Train 1 person
COACH
2 training slots.
May train the same
person two steps
TRUCK
DRIVER
Get 3 drinks from
each source on route
brand
MANAGER
Place airplane or
lower, max duration 4
KITCHEN
TRAINEE
Produce 1 burger
or 1 pizza
cart
OPERATOR
Get 2 drinks from
each source on route
Zeppelin
pilot
Get 2 drinks from
each source on route,
ignore roads
CAMPAIGN
MANAGER
brand
director
Place mailbox or
lower, max duration 3
Place radio or
lower, max duration 5
burger Cook
Produce 3 burgers
burger CHEF
Produce 8 burgers
PIZZA Cook
Produce 3 pizzas
PIZZA CHEF
Produce 8 pizzas
Place house
or garden
Price +$10
LOCAL
MANAGER
Regional
Manager
DISCOUNT
MANAGER
VICE
PRESIDENT
SENIOR
VICE PRESIDENT
EXECUTIVE
VICE PRESIDENT
Place new restaurant,
COMING SOON.
Drive-in available
Place or move
restaurant, opens
immediately.
Drive-in available
Price - $3
Guru
3 training slots.
May train the same
person up to
three steps
4 5 10
2x:
HR DIRECTOR
Hire 1 person
4x: or $5 less salary
CFO
Add +50% to cash
earned this round
ERRAND
BOY
Get 1 drink of
any type
RECRUITING
GIRL
Hire 1 person
MANAGEMENT
TRAINEE
MARKETING
TRAINEE
Place billboard,
max duration 2
Filling the bank
Place $50 x the number of players into the bank pool. Use a practical
set of (small) bills. Put the rest of the money back into the box for now.
Players do not get any money at the start of the game.
Player markers
Each player chooses one of the restaurant chains available and receives
a CEO card, 3 restaurants and a set of 3 bank reserve cards.
Initial order of play
Collect the turn order markers of the chosen restaurant chains and
shuffl e them. Randomly take out the turn order markers and place
them on the turn order track in the order in which they were drawn.
Placing the first restaurants
Each player has to place one starting restaurant.
Start with the player who is last on the turn order, and end with the
player who is first. Each player may either place a restaurant, or pass. If
anyone passed, a second round is executed in turn order. Each player
who has not yet placed a restaurant must now place it. Players who
have already placed a restaurant do not participate in the second round.
Th ere are a few limitations on the initial placement of restaurants:
 Restaurants must be placed fully on empty squares that do not
contain any other restaurants, roads, drinks, or houses.
 Restaurants must be placed so that their entrance borders on a
square with a road.
 Restaurants may not be placed in such a way that their entrance
is on the same tile as the entrance of an existing restaurant.
Setting goals
Each player now chooses one of their bank reserve cards. ThE chosen
reserve cards are placed face down next to the bank. The other reserve
cards are discarded unseen. They will not be used for now.
Th e chosen bank reserve cards collectively indicate how much money
will be added to the bank once it runs out of money. The higher the
value of the cards, the longer the game will last. At the start of the game,
players will not know exactly how long the game will take, which makes
balancing short and long term strategies more challenging.
Phase by
phase
Phase 1: Restructuring
Each player simultaneously chooses which of their employees to use
this turn. Th ese cards are placed face down on the table. All other cards
are placed face down in a separate pile. Aft er all players have chosen
their cards, they simultaneously open the pile of cards to be used this
turn. These employees are said to be at work. The rest of the cards
cannot be used this turn, although they can be trained, and you will
need to pay their salary if they are not fired. These cards are said to be
on the beach.
During all phases except this one, every player can at any time request
to see the cards of another player. This includes both the cards at work
and those cards on the beach.
In the first turn, the CEO will be the only card played. The CEO is
always at work.
In all subsequent turns, after opening the pile, the cards at work must
be placed into a company structure. The cards are placed in a pyramid.
Each card is placed under the person he/she is reporting to. The top of
the pyramid is the CEO, who obviously reports to nobody.
The company structure always contains the CEO. The CEO can have
up to three cards reporting to him. This is indicated by the 3 slots (rectangles)
on the CEO card. The cards reporting to the CEO can be either
normal staff or managers (black cards only). Each manager can have
between 2-10 people reporting to him, as indicated by the number of
slots on the card. Cards reporting to a manager can only be normal
employees, not other managers.
If a player has inadvertently placed more cards than can fit into the
company structure, all cards except the CEO are placed on the beach
and the player has to play his turn with only the CEO.
After the bank reserve cards have been opened, CEOs may gain or lose
a slot. Th e extra slot can be used for normal staff or managers. You can
use a reserve card to indicate the new number of CEO slots.
Phase 2: Order of business
In this phase, players choose their position on the turn order track. Th e
player with the most open slots in his company structure may choose
first, followed by the player with the second largest number of open
slots, etc. Open slots are slots on a CEO or manager that have not been
used for an employee card. If a player has the First airplane campaign
milestone, he counts two extra open slots.
If two or more players have the same number of open slots, the one who
was ahead in turn order in the previous turn chooses first.
Players choose their position in the turn order by placing the turn
order marker on an available spot on the turn order track. Note that
RECRUITING
GIRL
Hire 1 person
Example: a fledgling company structure.
there are only as many spots on the chart as there are players participating.
For example, with 3 players, you cannot choose the 4th position.
Phase 3: Working 9:005:00
In this phase, all players take turns in turn order. Each player may
perform one action for each card he has at work. The actions of the
pricing manager, discount manager, luxury manager, CFO, recruiting
manager, HR director and waitress are mandatory; the actions of all
other employees are optional. A player completes all of his actions before
the next player gets his turn. The available actions are indicated
on the cards.
Actions have to be performed in the order listed here; The position of a
card in the organizational chart has no influence.
Recruit
Each company always gets one free recruitment action performed by
the CEO. You can hire additional employees by having recruitment
cards in your company structure. For each recruitment action available,
you may hire one additional employee.
You may only hire people at entry positions (indicated by in the top
left corner of the card). Take the card(s) you want and add them to
your pile of cards that are on the beach. If a certain deck runs out of
cards, you may no longer hire that type of employee until cards become
available again. However, you may hire such a card if you immediately
train it to a higher level in the training sub-phase of this turn (so you
dont actually have to take the card).
Recruitment actions are available on the recruiting girl card (1x), the
recruiting manager (2x) and the HR director (4x). Note that unused
recruitment actions on the recruiting manager and HR director will
give a salary discount in phase 5.
Train
For each training action in your company structure you may train one
person one step. You may only train employee cards that are on the
beach, including employees you just hired. Employees that are currently
at work in your company structure and busy marketeers cannot be
trained. Marketeers, kitchen staff and buyers each have their own upgrade
track. All other (non-entry) employees are trained directly from
managers (black cards).
Most cards list a number of training options on the bottom of the card.
For example, the kitchen trainee can be trained into a burger cook or
a pizza cook. Cards that have no training options listed cannot be
trained.
Return the card you want to train to the main stock of cards and replace
it with the card you want to train it to.
In general, you may not train an employee you have just trained any
further in the same turn. Exceptions are:
 A coach may train the same card two steps;
 A guru may train the same card up to three steps;
 If you have the First to pay $20 in salaries milestone, you
may use multiple trainers, coaches and gurus to train the same
card.
A coach (or guru) may alternatively divide their attention over multiple
employees, for example training each one step.
You cannot train to a position if the final card is not available in the
stock. However, if you train multiple steps or hire and immediately
train a person, the intermediate cards do not have to be available.
You may only have one copy of each card marked with SYMBOL.
Hire 1 person
Initiate marketing campaigns
For each marketeer in your company structure, you may place a marketing
campaign on the board. Depending on the type of marketeer,
you may place either a billboard, a mailbox, an airplane or a radio campaign.
The marketeer also indicates a certain specific range and maximum
duration. After you place the campaign, you have to choose what
you want to advertise.
Type of campaign: Marketing trainees may place only a billboard;
Campaign managers may place a mailbox or billboard; brand managers
may place an airplane, mailbox or billboard; and a brand director may
place any type of campaign.
Range: Each marketeer has a certain range. For example, the marketing
trainee has a range of 2. This means he can place billboards on his
own tile (0), an adjacent tile (1) or a tile two steps away. All connections
must be by road and start at a restaurant entrance. You can freely
choose which of your restaurants the marketeer starts counting range
from.
Brand managers and directors are not limited by range. Th ey can place
campaigns on areas that they cannot reach by road, but when they place
a billboard, mailbox, or radio, it still has to be placed adjacent to a road.
Duration: The text on the marketeer card states the maximum duration
of a campaign that the marketeer can initiate. The minimum duration of
a campaign is 1 turn. For example, a marketing trainee has a maximum
duration of 2, so he can initiate a campaign that runs for 1 or 2 turns.
Marketing campaigns can never be ended prematurely.
Placing the campaign: Billboards, mailboxes and radios must be
placed on empty squares on the board. They must connect to the road
used to reach the tile. If a marketing campaign spans multiple tiles,
only one of the squares adjacent to a road needs to be in range of the
marketeer. The marketing tile itself has to be in range, not just the road
used to get there.
Airplanes must be placed on the side of the board. Airplanes do not have
to be connected to a road and are not aff ected by range. The available
airplanes have a size of 1, 3 or 5 squares and must always be placed so
that they fly over the corresponding number of rows or columns on the
boardit is not allowed to place an airplane so that it would fly outside
of the board.
It is allowed to place a marketing campaign in a location where it will
not reach any houses.
Determine what to advertise: A campaign can advertise either pizza,
burgers, or one type of drink. To indicate this, place wooden pieces of
the advertised type on the campaign as advertising markers. The number
of pieces should correspond to the duration of the campaign.
Marketeer will be busy: After placing the campaign, put the marketeer
card aside and place a busy chip on the card. The number on
the busy chip should correspond to that on the marketing campaign.
This indicates the marketeer card will be unavailable until the marketing
campaign ends. The marketeer will not take up a slot in your organizational
structure when busy.
If a player has the First billboard placed milestone, marketing campaigns
placed by that player will not end. To indicate this, place the
campaign tile on its eternal side on the board with a single wooden piece
on it. The corresponding marketeer card will be unavailable for the
rest of the game. It will not be returned to the stock or the players hand.
Xango Blues Bar has played two marketing trainees in its structure this
turn. It can place both billboards 11 and 14, as shown in the picture above.
The range to play billboard 11 is 0, as it is on the same tile as the
restaurant. Th e range to play billboard 14 is 2 (the maximum for the
marketing trainee), as you have to cross into an adjacent tile twice.
Even though it is not yet possible for Xango Blues Bar to deliver to house
15, placing billboard 14 may still make sense: by adding a garden to house
15, it will become accessible by road.
Get food & drinks
If you have any kitchen staff and/or buyers in your structure, you may
take food and drinks from the general stock following the instructions on
the card. Earned food and drinks are kept in front of the player and are
available to all restaurants in the players chain when needed.
Kitchen trainee: take one burger or pizza.
Errand boy: take one drink (softdrink, beer, or lemonade) of your choice.
Burger cook and/or chef: take the number of burgers as written on the card.
Pizza cook and/or chef: take the number of pizzas as written on the card.
Cart operator: starting from one of your restaurant entrances, trace a
route of range 2 over roads. Including the tile of your restaurant, the route
will thus cover up to three tiles. Take 2 drinks from the stock for each
drink symbol you pass by on either side of the road. Note that you have
to traverse the road directly (orthogonally) adjacent to the drink symbol.
If there are multiple drink symbols on the same tile, it is sometimes possible
to pass more than one of them. However, it is not allowed to make
U-turns in order to do so. There is no need for the cart operator to return
to one of your restaurants..
Truck driver: Same as cart operator, but the truck has a range of 3, and
takes 3 drinks per symbol you pass by.
Zeppelin pilot: Starting from your restaurant entrance, trace a route of
range 4, ignoring roads. Including the tile of your restaurant, the route
will cover up to five tiles. You may not cover the same tile twice. Collect
2 drinks from stock for each drink symbol on the tiles you fly over. If
there are multiple drink symbols on a tile, you may collect drinks for
all of them.
If a player has the First Errand Boy Played milestone, each source
will provide an extra drink. Errand boys will also bring in two drinks of
the same type, including the errand boy just played.
If a player has the First Cart Operator Played milestone, his cart
operators, truck drivers and zeppelin pilots have one additional range.
Place new houses and gardens
If your structure contains a new business developer, you may place a
new house on the map, or add a garden to an existing house.
Placing a new house: A new house may be placed in any empty area
on the map, provided the house is connected to at least one road. There
are no range limitations. You may freely choose which house to place.
Placing a new garden: A new garden must be placed so that it connects
to a house printed on a map tile. It has to connect over 2 squares, so that
the final house and garden forms a 2x3 rectangle. Gardens may only be
placed on empty squares. Each house may only get one garden. Turn
the garden so that it is obvious which house it belongs to. Houses that
have been placed on the board by a new business developer automatically
come with a garden, and may not get another one.
Place or move restaurants
If you have a local manager or a regional manager in your structure,
you may place a new restaurant or move an existing one. A restaurant
must be placed fully on empty squares that do not contain any other
map elements. It must be also be placed so that its entrance is adjacent
to a road. However, unlike during the initial placement, a restaurant
may be placed in such a way that its entrance is on the same tile as the
entrance of another restaurant.
Local manager: A local manager may place a new restaurant within
a range of 3 tiles, travelled by road, from one of the chains existing
restaurants. The new restaurant must be placed with the printed entrance
connecting to a road. This does not have to be the road used to
determine the range. The new restaurant is placed with the COMING
SOON side up. It will only open at the end of the turn. Note that as
long as the local manager is active, restaurants of that chain have a drive-
in, and are considered to have entrances in each corner.
Regional manager: A regional manager may place a restaurant anywhere
on the board, provided the entrance connects to a road. He may
also pick up one of his restaurants already on the board and place it
somewhere else and/or rotate it. Restaurants that have been placed
or moved by a regional manager are active immediately: there is no
COMING SOON waiting period. Note that as long as the regional
manager is active, restaurants of that chain have a drive-in, and are
considered to have entrances in each corner.
Phase 4: Dinnertime
Its evening, and the inhabitants go out to get some food. This happens
in the order of the numbers printed on the houses, starting with the
lowest number on the board. Players make no decisions in this phase;
the inhabitants of the houses will determine where to eat based on the
rules given in this section.
To determine if and where a house will eat, follow these steps:
 If no demand counters have been placed on the house, its
inhabitants will not go out to eat.
 If there are demand counters, check if there is a chain with a
restaurant connected to the house by road which can deliver all
of the food and drinks the inhabitants want. For example, if the
house contains demand for 2 burgers and a beer, there needs to
be a chain that can provide 2 burgers and a beerif the chain has
only burgers, or not enough burgers, the inhabitants will search
for a better place or decide not to go out. There are no range restrictions,
but there must be a road connection between the house
and the restaurant. You may start at any road orthogonally adjacent
to the house or the garden. If there is no road connection, the
inhabitants will stay at home. If there is one chain that fulfills the
requirements, the inhabitants will eat there.
 If there are multiple chains that can provide the full menu, and
that have a restaurant connected by road to the house, competition
ensues. The inhabitants will go to the restaurant by evaluating
the price and the distance.
 The standard unit price of each good is $10. This unit price
will be different if the chain has one or more price managers
(-$1), discount managers (-$3), or a luxury manager (+$10) in
its structure. The First to lower prices milestone permanently
lowers the unit price of that chain by $1. Note that bonuses
(CFO, First burger marketed, etc.) do not alter the unit price.
For example, a chain with 2 active price managers and an active
discount manager will charge a unit price of $5.
 To determine the distance, determine the range from the house
to the closest restaurant of each of the chains. You must follow
the road and end up at an entrance of the restaurant. Each tile
border you cross counts as one step. So, a house on the same
tile as an restaurant entrance will be at distance 0 if the two are
connected by a road on the same tile.
 Add up the unit price and the distance. Note that the number of
demand tokens does not matter for this calculation. The inhabitants
will eat at the restaurant which has the lowest result. So,
they may walk one step further to save $1 per item, 2 steps to
save $2, etc.
 If two chains have the same (unit price + distance), inhabitants
will go to the restaurant with the most waitresses in its structure.
 If both chains also have the same number of waitresses in their
structure, inhabitants will go to the chain that is earlier in the
turn order.
The chain which is chosen by the inhabitants must serve the food
and drinks. Discard the demand counters from the house and the
identical markers from the chains stock. The chain gets paid for
each item it sells. Specifically, they get the unit price + bonuses
from milestones for each item sold.
If the house has a garden, the chain receives double the unit price
for each item. Note that the bonuses are not doubled, so the final
income is (2 x unit price) + bonuses.
As the order of the houses depends on the house numbers, it is
quite possible that a chain runs out of food to serve houses later
in the order. These will then search for food elsewhere. In some
cases, this may lead to some of the inhabitants travelling very long
distances, or not finding food at all.
Example: a player sells 1 burger and 2 beer to a house with a garden.
He has the First burger marketed milestone card, which
gives a bonus of $5 on burgers. He has also played a luxury manager,
which raises the unit price by $10. His unit price is $10 +
$10 = $20. The garden doubles this income, to 2 x $20 = $40. The
burger bonus of $5 is then added, so the income for the burger
is $45. He has no bonus for drinks, so the beer sells for the same
unit price of $20, which is doubled because of the garden to $40.
So his total income is $45 + 2x $40 = $125.
Waitresses: After all houses have been processed, each chain receives
$3 (or $5 if they have the First waitress played milestone) for each
waitress in their structure.
CFO: Then, each chain that has a CFO in their structure (or the First
to have $100 milestone) receives a 50% bonus on all cash, including
waitress tips, that it earned in this turn (rounded up).
If at any time during this phase the bank has insufficient funds to pay
out all income, the bank breaks and reserve cards are opened (see breaking
the bank). If the bank breaks a second time, the game ends at the
end of this phase, and salaries will not be paid this turn.
Breaking the bank (1st time): Open the reserve cards that were chosen
by the players at the start of the game. Sum the money amounts shown
on the reserve cards and add this total to the bank.
Each reserve card also shows 2, 3 or 4 open slots. Whichever number
occurs most determines the number of slots all CEOs will have from
the next turn onwards. For example, if there are two 2 slot cards, one
3 slot, and one 4 slot, all CEOs will have 2 slots instead of 3 for
the remainder of the game. If two types of reserve cards occur equally
often, the highest number determines the slotsfor example, two 2
slots cards and two 4 slots cards will lead to all CEOs having 4 slots.
Place the appropriate reserve cards under the CEOs as a visual reminder
of the new number of slots.
Breaking the bank (2nd time): If the bank breaks a second time,
the game ends. Finish phase 4 and continue paying all players their
earnings, if need be by writing cash still owed from the bank down on
paper. Whoever has the most cash at the end of this phase wins the
game. In case of a tie, the tied player who is earlier in turn order wins.
Phase 5: Payday
Each chain may now choose to fire any number of people in the company
structure or on the beach. Cards that are fired must be placed back
into the general stock of available cards.
Normally, marketeers that are busy may not be fired.
Then, each chain needs to pay $5 for each card in their structure or on
the beach that has a on the card. Note that there are a number of
milestones and employee abilities that allow you to reduce the amount
of salary you pay. Paid wages are returned to the bank.
Busy marketeers with a must still be paid. In exceptional cases, a
player may have no money but an obligation to pay a busy marketeer.
In this case, the marketeer must be fired. The corresponding marketing
campaign remains on the board. Note that this is only allowed if you
have already fired all of your other employees that require a salary.
Recruiting manager and HR director: If the company structure
contains a Recruiting manager or HR director that has not been used
to full capacity for hiring new people, the additional actions of these
managers reduce the amount the chain pays in salaries. Each left-over
action gives a $5 discount.
All discounts that are available have to be used (this may be relevant if
you want to get the First to pay $20 in salaries milestone). No matter
how much salary discount you have, however, the minimum amount to
be paid is $0people will not pay to work for you!
Phase 6: Marketing campaigns
In this phase, all marketing campaigns run. This happens in the order
of the numbers printed on the campaigns, with the lowest number first.
Note that each house can have at most 3 demand tokens in total, or 5
if the house has a garden. If a campaign reaches a house that is already
filled with demand tokens, it has no effect on that house. This may lead
to some campaigns being utterly useless, as is the nature of marketing
campaigns.
Billboard campaign: A billboard reaches all houses it is orthogonally
adjacent to. Normally, it will reach 1 or 2 houses only. Place a demand
token of the type advertised by the campaign on each adjacent house. A
house will be reached even if only its garden is adjacent to the billboard.
Mailbox campaign: A mailbox reaches all houses it can get to without
crossing a road (you can think of the area enclosed by roads and perhaps
the border of the board as a block). A mailbox is only stopped by
roads, and will freely pass through other map elements such as restaurants
and houses. Place a demand token of the type advertised by the
campaign on each house in the block.
Airplane campaign: An airplane reaches every house that it can fly
over. These are all houses in a line of 1, 3 or 5 rows or columns across
the board starting from the airplane counter. Place a demand token of
the type advertised by the campaign on each house in the fly-over zone.
A house will be reached even if only part of the house, or its garden, is
in the fly-over zone.
Radio campaign: A radio campaign reaches every house on the tile
on which the radio campaign has been placed, as well as houses on all
8 tiles surrounding that tile. A house will be reached even if only part
of the house, or the garden, is on one of these tiles. A radio campaign
started by a player with the First radio campaign milestone will place
two demand tokens.
After running a campaign, remove one advertising token from the
campaign (unless it is an eternal campaign). If the campaign has no
more tokens left, return it to the stock and return the corresponding
marketeer to the player. Otherwise, the campaign stays on the board,
and the marketeer remains busy. Note that a busy marketeer is never
placed into your company structure next turn, and also will not require
an (open) slot. He may still require a salary though!
Phase 7: Clean up
All players who do not have the first to throw away drink/food
milestone must discard any food or drinks they still own.
All cards from the company structure and the beach are taken back into
hand. Other players may ask to see them at this point.
All restaurants that are showing the COMING SOON side are turned
over to their WELCOME side.
If any milestones have been awarded this turn, all remaining milestone
cards of the same type are turned upside down. These are no longer
available for the rest of the game.
Advertising tokens that have been placed on campaigns, and demand
tokens that have been placed on houses remain on the board.
The next turn then starts, commencing with phase 1.
If a player at any point in the turn fulfi lls the requirements of a milestone
card, he is immediately awarded that milestone card. Most milestones
give benefits. Th ese benefi ts take effect immediately. You must apply the
benefit for the rest of the game, even if it is not helpful.
Other players can claim the same milestone provided that they do so
during the same turn. Occasionally there may not be enough milestones
cards; please make a proxy copy to hand out in that case. In phase 7 of each
turn, all remaining milestone cards that have been claimed at least once
are taken out of the game and can no longer be claimed by other players.
Milestones are very important in the game and it is vital to plan your
strategy around them.
First billboard placed
This milestone is awarded when you place a billboard campaign on the map.
For the rest of the game, two eff ects occur:
You no longer pay salaries for marketeers (campaign manager,
brand manager, brand director). It is not allowed to pay salaries
voluntarily.
When you place a marketing campaign, it remains on the board
forever. To indicate this, place the campaign tile on its eternal
side on the board with a single wooden piece on it. The corresponding
marketeer card will be unavailable for the rest of the
game. It will not be returned to the stock or the players hand.
This rule already applies to the billboard you place to get the
milestone.
First to train someone
This milestone is awarded when you train an employee to a higher level.
For the rest of the game, you will receive a $15 discount on salary costs.
Salary costs can never go below $0. Using the discount is obligatory;
you may not voluntarily pay salaries.
First to hire three people in one turn
This milestone is awarded when you hire three people or more in the
same turn.
You immediately receive 2 management trainee cards that are placed
on the beach. If you have active training capacity, you may immediately
train these cards as recruitment happens before training. In the unlikely
case that there are not enough management trainee cards left, you
receive whatever is left .
First burger/pizza/drink marketed
Th ese milestones are awarded when you place a marketing campaign
that advertises burgers/pizza/any type of drink, respectively.
For the rest of the game, that chain receives a bonus for being the
Home of the original burger/pizza/drink. Whenever it sells a burger/
pizza/drink, it gets an additional $5 bonus. This bonus does not aff ect
the unit price. This means it has no influence on the inhabitants decisions
on where to eat; and it is not doubled by gardens. Like all income,
however, it can be boosted by a CFO.
In the case of drinks, the bonus counts for all drinks, not just the type
originally marketed.
First errand boy played
Th is milestone is awarded when you play an errand boy in your structure.
It is not awarded for errand boys on the beach.
For the rest of the game, your buyers (errand boys, cart operators, truck
drivers, and zeppelin pilots) get 1 extra drink per source they encounter.
So, errand boys will get 2 (identical) drinks of any type. Cart operators
and zeppelin pilots will gather 3 drinks for each drink symbol they
pass, and truck drivers will receive 4.
This bonus applies to the errand boy played to get the milestone.
First to have $20
This milestone is awarded if you have $20 cash at any time (in practice
this means aft er getting income and before paying out salaries).
You may look at the face down reserve cards. You are allowed to make
truthful or confusing noises about whatever you see on the cards. However,
you may not show them to other players.
First burger/pizza produced
These milestones are awarded when you produce a burger/pizza, respectively.
You immediately receive a burger cook/ pizza cook card. As this
milestone is awarded during production, you may not train the burger
cook, as training occurs before production. If there are no more cook
cards of the correct type, you receive nothing. The cook will require a
salary in the Payday phase. If you do not want to pay her, you may fire
the cook instead.
First waitress played
This milestone is awarded when you play a waitress in your structure. It
is not awarded for waitresses on the beach.
For the rest of the game, you will receive $5 for each waitress in your
structure rather than $3. Th is bonus already applies to the waitress
played to get the milestone.
First to throw away drink/food
This milestone is awarded when you throw away at least one food or
drink token in phase 7 (Cleanup).
For the rest of the game, this milestone card functions as a freezer. You
may store up to 10 tokens (food and/or drink) in the freezer during
phase 7. These items may be sold in subsequent turns. Items can be kept
in the freezer for as long as you want. If you have more than 10 tokens,
you may freely choose which ones to keep and which ones to discard.
You may not yet store anything in the freezer in the turn in which you
receive this milestone.
Milestones
First to lower prices
This milestone is awarded when you play a pricing manager or a discount
manager into your structure, thereby lowering your prices.
For the rest of the game, your prices will automatically be $1 lower.
For instance, they will be $9 if you play no price related managers. You
cannot undo this effect.
This takes effect immediately, so your prices will already be $1 lower in
the turn in which you first lowered prices.
First cart operator played
This milestone is awarded when you place the first cart operator into
your structure. It is not awarded for cart operators on the beach.
For the rest of the game, your cart operators, truck drivers and zeppelin
pilots will have +1 range. This takes effect immediately, so your first
cart operator will already have a range of 3.
First airplane campaign
This milestone is awarded when you place an airplane campaign.
For the rest of the game, when determining order of play, you add 2
extra open slots. These slots cannot be used to play managers or other
employees, they are just a bonus when determining the order of play.
First radio campaign
This milestone is awarded when you place a radio campaign.
For the rest of the game, if you have a radio campaign running in phase
6: place 2 goods of the type advertised on each of the houses reached by
the radio. If the house is already full, place 0 or 1 goods, depending on
how much advertising the house will still take.
You may not choose to market 1 instead of 2 goods. Your radio will
market the same good twice, it cannot market two different goods.
This takes effect immediately, so in phase 6 of the turn in which the
milestone is achieved.
First to have $100
This milestone is awarded if you have $100 or more in cash at the end
of phase 4.
Your CEO gets the ability to also do the work of a CFO. This gives a 50%
cash bonus at the end of phase 4 (dinnertime). You do not get a CFO
card. If you already have a CFO card, you must fire the CFO in phase 5
of this turn. You may not train a CFO anymore after you have achieved
this milestone.
The new ability takes effect only from the next turn onward, as you can
get it only after phase 4 has just ended.
First to pay $20 or more in salaries
This milestone is awarded if you have to pay $20 or more in salaries
in phase 5. These salaries have to be actually paid out you may not
count salaries that are covered by a discount. Note that you have to use
all discounts still available to you at the start of phase 5. You may not
voluntarily pay more salaries than you have to. (Of course, you may use
a recruiting manager or HR director to hire an employee in phase 2 so
her salary discounts are no longer available in phase 5).
For the rest of the game, you may use training actions provided by multiple
employees to train the same person. For instance, with 2 trainers
and a coach, you could now train a management trainee up to an executive
vice president in one turn.
Introductory game:
Food Chain Magnate is a highly unforgiving game. If you make a mistake,
it can be very hard or even impossible to get back on track.
In order to get to know the game, we strongly advise during your first
game to alter the rules as follows:
 Do not use the reserve cards.
 Put $75 per player into the bank pool instead of $50.
 Take out all milestones.
 Do not pay any salaries (skip phase 5).
 The game ends when the bank breaks once.
This will allow for a somewhat shorter game that enables everyone to
get to know the rules without running their companies into the ground.
For your next game, we recommend playing with these same alterations
and adding the milestone cards (even if some of them will not have
a benefit in the introductory game).
Strategy Guide
Some strategic pointers:
 The best strategy in this game is highly dependent on: the board
layout, your board position, and the actions of other players (in
no particular order).
 Milestones are the key to planning your strategy. You will need
to achieve milestones before others do. Reaching the right
milestones as soon as possible is often essential, as the others
will likely be taken by the time you reach them.
 There is a trade-off between building up your company through
recruitment and training and earning money through marketing
and sales. The winning mix depends on how long the game
will take. Th is is strongly determined by the trade-off chosen by
the players.
 The game normally accelerates strongly towards the end. You
can win by earning money only in the last turn, if you have prepared
well. Or, you could still be preparing for a turn that never
comes.
 You can hurt other players by advertising goods they cannot
produce. But beware, you may also be helping them sell more
later on!
 Price wars are very effective to attack others, but they will be
very costly to yourself as well. Use them tactically.
 Houses with gardens are very lucrative but may attract competition.
 You can sometimes make more money selling a few things at
high prices than by selling a lot of things at a discount. But it can
also be the other way around.
Sometimes, it can be useful to advertise in such a way that other
players earn moneyas long as you earn more yourself!
Combine the previous two ideas.



GAME NAME:
A Feast for Odin

DESIGNED BY:
Uwe Rosenberg
Rulebook
A Feast for Odin is a saga in the form of a board game. You are reliving the cultural achievements, mercantile
expeditions, and pillages of those tribes we know as Vikings todaya term that was used quite differently
towards the end of the first millennium.
When the northerners went out for a raid, they used to say they headed out for a viking. Their Scandinavian
ancestors, however, were much more than just pirates. They were explorers and founders of states. Leif Eriksson
is said to be the first European in America, long before Columbus.
In what is known today as Normandy, the intruders were not called Vikings but Normans. One of them is the
famous William the Conqueror who invaded England in 1066. He managed to do what the king of Norway failed
to do only a few years prior: conquer the Throne of England.
The reason why the people of these times became such strong seafarers is due to their unfortunate agricultural
situation. Crop shortfalls caused great distress.
In this game, you will raid and explore new territories. You will also experience their day-to-day activities:
collecting goods to achieve a financially secure position in society.
In the end, the player whose possessions bear the greatest value will be declared the winner.

COMPONENTS:
- 2 Game Boards
- 1 large action board with action spaces
- 4 home boards (one for each player)
- 1 oval supply board for the grey special tiles
- 1 small supply board for the ships
- 4 two-sided exploration boards
Dice:
- 1 orange eight-sided die
- 1 blue twelve-sided die
Goods boxes:
- 2 goods boxes to store the goods tiles
- 15 special tiles
Tiles:
- Money
- 125 silver coins, including:
Wooden Goods:
- 2 extension tiles to extend the action board
- 1 large round overview tile
Building tiles:
- 3 shed building tiles,
- 3 stone house building tiles,
- 5 long house building tiles
- 8 mountain strips
- 32 ship tiles, including:
- 10x whaling boats 12x knarrs 10x longships
- 32x wood, 24x stone, and 40x ore
Other Wooden Components:
Food:
front side: farm product
back side: animal product
Animals
front side: livestock
back side: pregnant dam
Equipment
front side: craft product
back side: luxury good
The back of each Thing Penalty is
different: 5 wood, 5 stone, 3 ore, 3 bow and
arrow, 3 snares, 3 spears, and 3 long swords.
- 25x peas / mead
- 18x sheep / pregnant sheep
- 15x cattle / pregnant cattle
- 20x flax / stockfish
- 20x beans / milk
- 20x grain / salt meat
- 17x cabbage / game meat
- 15x fruits / whale meat
- 43x oil / rune stone
- 30x hide / silverware
- 7 Thing Penalty tiles
- 30x wool / chest
- 20x linen / silk
- 20x skin and bones / spices
- 20x fur / jewelry
- 18x robe / treasure chest
- 15x clothing / silver hoard
- 48 Vikings (12 for each player)
- 1 brown start player moose
- 1 white round tracking cube
- 12 plastic bags, 1 appendix,
1 almanac, and this rulebook.
Goods:
346 goods tiles, including:
190 Occupations,
divided in three decks A, B, and C
45 light brown
starting occupation
cards
145 dark brown
occupation cards
47 red Weapon cards
12x bow and arrow, 12x snare,
12x spear, 11x long sword

BEFORE YOUR FIRST GAME:
Goods:
This game comes with a large number of goods tiles. In order to
save you the hassle of storing the tiles in an assortment of plastic
bags, we have provided two goods boxes so that you can better
store and organize the goods tiles.
Each row stores goods of the same color and each column stores
goods of the same shape. Note that orange and red goods of the
same shape are on two sides of the same tile, as are green and
blue goods. Divide these goods (except for sheep and cattle) into
two piles and place each pile in its designated compartment.
For example, every beans tile has milk on the other side.
The game provides more tiles than you would normally need,
even more than you can fit into the goods boxes. Store any excess
tiles as a reserve in the provided bags.
The following table shows how you should organize the goods
tiles in the goods boxes. The goods boxes have alternating
small and large compartments. In the first goods box, the small
compartments are reserved for goods of the size of peas and
beans, and the large ones are reserved for goods of the size of flax
and grain. In the second goods box, the small compartments are
meant for goods of the size of cabbage and fruits, and the large
ones for goods of the size of sheep and cattle.

SETUP:
Action Board and Goods Boxes
Place the large action board in the middle of the table. In a
4-player game, add the two extension tiles to the game board as
shown in the illustration, randomly choosing which side is face
up. (In games with 1 to 3 players, you do not need these tiles.)
Open the goods boxes and place them on the table next to each
other, so that all players can easily access them.
Supply Boards for Special Tiles and Ships
Place the supply boards for special tiles and ships next to the
goods boxes. Aside from the blue standard goods in the top row
of the goods boxes, there is a number of blue special tiles. Unlike
the standard goods, which are supposed to be in unlimited supply,
there is only one copy of each special tile. (Also, the special tiles
are blue on both sides.)
Place the special tiles on the oval supply board. The other supply
board is for the three types of ships. Sort the ships by type and
place them face up in separate stacks on the supply board.
The goods boxes
1 oval supply board for the
grey special tiles
1 small supply board for the ships
Occupation and Weapon Cards
There is an A, B or C at the bottom right of the weapon
cards, indicating to which deck each card belongs. We recommend
beginners only use cards from deck A, while experienced players
use cards from both deck B and C, or just shuffle every deck
together. Sort the occupation cards according to their light or dark
brown back to form two stacks.
An illustration at the top left of the game board indicates what you
receive at the start of the game: Each player draws 1 starting
card from the stack of light brown occupation cards into their
hand. (After that, remove the remaining light brown cards from
the game.) Each player takes 1 bow and arrow, 1 snare, and
1 spear weapon card, as well as 1 mead goods tile.
Shuffle the remaining weapon cards and place them face down
in a stack on the table. Shuffle the occupation cards with a dark
brown back and also place them face down in a stack on the table.
Your Personal Boards and the Vikings
Each player takes a home board.
The home boards are two-sided. One side is for a game lasting
7 rounds (long game), the other for a game lasting over 6 rounds
(short game). Decide how many rounds you wish to play and
place the according side face up.
Each player chooses a color and takes
the 12 Vikings in their color.
Place a Viking on each numbered space of the Banquet Table
track (at the top right) of your home board and the rest on the
Thing Square (the Vikings meeting place). The latter are your
starting Vikings. (Consequently, in the short game, you start the
game with one more Viking.)
To the right of the Thing Square, there is the bay with landing
stages for ships. To the left of the Thing Square, there is the main
placement area for your valuable goods.
Do not open yet! Do not open yet!
These are your starting cards along with
1 mead. Always keep all tiles and cards face
up in front of you and visible to all players.
By no means will you need
all of the cards each game.
Set up only part of them and
replenish the stack later, if
need be.
GAME START:
Shetland
OR
Faroe
Islands
Iceland
OR
Greenland
OR
Bear Island
Baffin Island
OR
Labrador
OR
Newfoundland
Your starting card suggests which path
you might want to take during the course
of the game.
Place 7 Vikings on the Banquet Table track
(only 6 in the short game).

The long game is the main version of the game. We recommend the short game to all players who would like
to familiarize themselves with the game mechanics first. On the other hand, veteran players who know every
aspect of the game by heart might find the shorter version more challenging.

6 Mountain Strips, Building Resources, and Silver
Shuffle the eight mountain strips and turn two of them face up
(three strips in a 4-player game). The remaining mountain strips
form a face down draw pile. Place the depicted goods on the spaces
of the face up mountain strips.
Sort the remaining wood, stone, ore, and silver tokens by type and
place them ready at hand.
Exploration Boards
Lay out the four exploration boards with their Shetland,
Faroe Islands, Iceland, and Greenland sides facing up in
that order.
Building Tiles
Place the shed, stone house, and long house building tiles
in separate stacks on the table.
OVERVIEW:
Place the round overview tile on the table and place the white
round tracking cube on space 1.
GENERAL OVERVIEW:
HOW TO PLAY THE GAME:
The basic principle of the game is simple. Each round, you place
your Vikings on the spaces of the action board and take the chosen
actions immediately.
WHAT YOU WANT TO ACHIEVE:
Your goal is to cover the spaces in the placement area of your
home board with green and blue goods tiles. If you leave gaps,
you can fill them with ore and silver (as shown below).
To get the goods tiles in the first place, you will either need
to obtain them by raiding (in the Viking fashion) or receive them
in exchange for farm goods.
This information bar depicts how to place goods in the
placement area of your home board. The green and blue color
stands for the respective goods.
Overseas trading plays a special role in all of this. It allows you to turn any number of different green goods (representing craft
products) into blue luxury goods in a single action. (How turning a lot of green goods into blue ones may benefit you is explained
in the Anytime Actions section on page 12.)
Because each action space can only
be occupied once per round, you will
quickly get in each others way.
Mountain strips at the start of a game
with up to 3 players
The letters A to D on the bottom
right of the boards indicate their
front sides.
At any time, you can move tiles
from your supply onto your
home board. Once on your
home board, you cannot take
them back.
The big numbers across the placement area of your home board
represent income values. The smallest visible income value
indicates your income for the current round (described further on
page 9).
Bonus
Some spaces of your home board feature goods symbols.
There are five goods spaces on
your home board.
You receive these goods each
round as a bonus once you have
covered all spaces surrounding
them.
 Sooner or later you may wish to cover the goods spaces to
increase your income. (By doing so, you forfeit the bonus.)
In the first example, the
mead space was covered.
In this one, it is completely
enclosed. Here, you would
get a bonus of 1 mead each
round.
 During the game, you can explore new territories and add them
to your home board. You will need ships to do so.
To explore Iceland, for instance,
you would need a knarr
or a longship.
What You Get Points For
At the end of the game, you will add the values of
your ships, houses, exploration boards, and goods.
Points are indicated by the shield symbol.
Your large ships can increase in value if you use them
for emigration. (Simply turn them to the other side when
that happens.)
After each emigration, you
will have one fewer ship at
your disposal (here:
a longship).
Your home board and the exploration boards have spaces that you
must cover with goods tiles to avoid negative points.
Fur can be effectively worth
8 points if you use it to cover
eight spaces with negative points.
The sheds, stone houses, and long houses also have spaces with
negative points, which you should cover with goods tiles.
 Sheds require wood and stone.
 The stone and long houses are special in that they allow you to
place orange and red food tiles in them as well as the usual
green and blue goods and silver coins, but not ore.
Note the two supporting pillars in the center of the long house:
these cannot be covered.
This information bar depicts how to place
goods in the placement areas of your houses
(further described on page 12).
You gain additional points for sheep and cattle, which breed every
other round, and for the occupation cards you have played.
The back sides of the animal
tiles show pregnant dams.
These are worth 1 additional point.
Occupations can be worth negative points. In
this example, the Undertaker is worth -1 point.
You start the game with an income
of 1 silver. The home board on the
previous page would generate an
income of 2 silver.
8 Course of Play
Randomly determine who receives the grey start player moose. The long game is played over 7 rounds (the short game over
6 rounds).
Each round consists of the following 12 phases, which are played
one after another in that order.
Phase 1: A New Viking
Take the leftmost Viking from the Banquet Table of your home
board and place it with your other Vikings on the Thing Square.
(The now empty space indicates the number of the current round.)
Each round, including the first,
you receive a new Viking.
Phase 2: Harvest
Below the new round number, there is note indicating what you
will receive during harvest.
Long game:
 During harvest, you can only get orange goods.
 Take the goods from the general supply and place them in your
personal supply.
The numbers on the tiles mean:
You receive one of each crop with a 1: peas, beans, and flax .
You receive one of each crop with a 1 or 2: peas, beans, flax,
and grain.
You receive one of each crop with a 1, 2, or 3: peas, beans,
flax, grain, and cabbage.
You receive one of each crop with a 1, 2, 3, or 4: peas, beans,
flax, grain, cabbage, and fruits.
No Harvest means you do not get any goods in the harvest
phase of that round.
Phase 3: Turn Exploration Boards and Placing Silver
In the action phase (phase 5), you can use your ships to claim
additional placement areas on the exploration boards. Some
exploration boards are available at the start, others become
available later. This is why each exploration board that has not
been claimed by a player is turned to its back side at some point.
A symbol below the harvest notes on your home board indicates
when to turn each exploration board.
In round 3 (round 2 in the short game), turn Shetland,
introducing Bear Island.
In round 4 (round 3 in the short game), turn the Faroe
Islands, introducing Baffin Island.
In round 5 (round 4 in the short game), turn Iceland,
introducing Labrador.
In round 6 (round 5 in the short game), turn Greenland,
introducing Newfoundland.
Increasing the Value of an Unclaimed Exploration Board
Each round in which you should turn an exploration board (short
game: rounds 2 to 5; long game: rounds 3 to 6), place 2 silver on
each unclaimed exploration board not being turned. Exploration
boards that players have already taken do not receive silver.
 When you turn an exploration board with silver on it, return the
silver to the general supply.
 Place silver on the other exploration boards even if the
exploration board that is supposed to be turned has already been
claimed by a player.
 There is no phase 3 in the first and last round. In those rounds,
no exploration board is turned and no silver is placed on any
of them.
We will explain the rules for the game with 2 to 4 players first.
The solo game rules can be found on page 23.
Example: In round 3, 2 silver are
placed on the Faroe Islands. In
round 4, the Faroe Islands are
turned to become Baffin Island
and the 2 silver placed there last
round are returned to the general
supply.
When you explain the game, it is a good idea to mention the goal of the game first and the phases of a round
shortly after. You can show that the game is played over six or seven rounds by pointing the players to the seven
Vikings on the Banquet Table. Once they are focused on that, you can easily explain the first three phases
with the information provided below it.
99
Phase 4: Draw a New Weapon
Each players draws a new weapon card and places it face up in
their supply.
You could draw a long sword, the only
type of weapon you do not have from
the start.
Phase 5: Actions
Beginning with the start player and in clockwise order, take
one or more Vikings from your Thing Square and place them
on exactly one unoccupied action space of the action board.
Continue doing so until all players have passed or placed all of
their available Vikings.
 You can pass even if you have Vikings left in your Thing Square.
Once you have passed, you cannot place any more Vikings that
round. (When you have none left, you must pass.)
Important: each action space can only be occupied once per round.
Another important rule: each action space in the first column
requires one Viking to activate. Each action space in the
second/third/fourth column requires two/three/four Vikings,
respectively.
The effect of each action space is explained in the next major
section (starting on page 14). You can tell what most effects do
from their illustration.
 You must use an action space immediately after you occupy it.
To occupy an action space, you must use at least one of its effects
(paying a cost is also considered an effect in and of itself).
 The action spaces on the action board are
organized in groups of similar effects. The
wood grain background helps to emphasize
this. The type of action spaces in each group
is stated in the left margin of the action board.
Also, note the actions you can take at any time
during the course of the game (see page 12).
 The action phase ends as soon as all players have placed all of
their Vikings or passed.
 Due to the varying number of Vikings that are required on each
action space, some players can run out of Vikings earlier than
others. A player without Vikings must pass. Continue until all
players have passed.
Phase 6: Determine Start Player
The player who placed Vikings last in the action phase receives
the start player moose and will be the start player in the next
action phase.
Phase 7: Income
During the game, you will place green and blue goods tiles on
your home board. The smallest uncovered value on the income
diagonal indicates the amount of silver you receive this phase.
 Important: You must cover the income values in ascending
diagonal order. This is explained further on page 12
(Anytime Actions).
During your first play, you might be
overwhelmed by the sheer number of
action spaces. Concentrate in the early
game on exploring the available options.
Use the first few rounds to prepare yourself
for what is to come. You will take the really
important and crucial actions later.
This game differentiates between income
and bonuses. Income is paid in silver
(this phase), bonuses are paid in goods
(phase 10).
In this example, 5 is the
smallest uncovered value, so
you would receive an income of
5 silver.
By claiming exploration boards, you can produce additional
income. Income from an exploration board is handled like
income from your home board (see also appendix, page 15).
Phase 8: Animal Breeding
At the bottom right of your home board, you can find storage
spaces (stables) for your sheep and cattle goods tiles. Please
note that these tiles show the same animal on both sidesone
side shows the non-pregnant animal, the other the pregnant one.
In this phase, your animals breed, according to the following rules:
 If you have at least 1 sheep with the pregnant sheep side facing
up, turn all of them to the other side and take 1 sheep tile (and
place it with the non-pregnant side facing up in your stable).
 If you have at least 2 sheep but no pregnant sheep, turn 1 of
them to the pregnant sheep side.
The same applies to cattle.
Examples of Animal Breeding:
 You have three sheep, one of which is pregnant. The pregnant one
gets a newborn, the other two remain non-pregnant. Afterward
you have four non-pregnant sheep.
 You have four non-pregnant sheep. Still, you can only turn one
of them to the pregnant side.
 You have two sheep, one of which is pregnant. During the action
phase, you spend the non-pregnant one. In the breeding phase
of that round, you are now left with a single pregnant sheep. It
still receives a newborn, even though it is the only sheep in the
stable. (Cest la vie.)
Phase 9: Feast
This phase focuses on the spaces of the Banquet Table track
with no Vikings.
In this example: 3 spaces have Vikings on them, 9 are empty.
Place orange and red food tiles from your supply (or stable)
and/or 1 silver coins on each empty space of the Banquet
Table, according to the following rules:
 Orange tiles (farm products) cannot be placed next to each other.
 Red tiles (animal products) also cannot be placed next to
each other.
 Silver coins can be placed next to each other.
(Ore cannot be placed on the Banquet Table.)
 One tile of each type may be placed horizontally to take up
more space at the table (like salt meat in the example below). All
other tiles of that type must be placed vertically (square tiles are
exempt from this rule, as it does not matter).
You should serve salt meat only once per feast to be efficient.
Bean dishes, on the other hand, can be served multiple times
without penalty.
Every tile you place on the Banquet Table must cover at least
one of the squares below the table and fit in the allowed space
(it cannot overhang). If you are not careful, you may have to
inefficiently place several tiles vertically to follow this rule.
When explaining the game, now is a good time to explain, in
detail, the placement of green and blue goods tiles on your
home board. Income is where these rules really matter a lot.
Earlier, on page 6, we gave a general overview of these rules.
A more elaborate explanation will follow on page 12.
Now let us continue with the sequence of a round.
Consequently, your sheep and cattle can
breed every other round.
These rules are also depicted below the Banquet Table.
The designers love for bean dishes
should be well-known. Vikings were very
thoughtful about what they ate. Too much
salt meat is unhealthy.
Thing Penalty
 For each space of your Banquet Table on which you could
not or did not want to place anything, you must take a Thing
Penalty tile and place it in your supply. You must keep these
tiles for the rest of the game. (This should not happen too often,
because the feast happens after you receive income. Income
should always provide enough silver to cover the spaces.)
At the end of the game, you lose 3 points for each penalty tile
you have.
At the end of this phase, move the goods on your Banquet Table
to the general supply.
This empty space means you must take a penalty tile.
Phase 10: Bonus
Some spaces in the placement area of your home board show a
goods symbol. These spaces count as already covered, but you
can cover them with goods tiles, if need be (according to the
placement rules, see Anytime Actions on page 12). If you leave
a goods space uncovered, but instead cover the 8 spaces around it,
you will receive that good as a bonus each round.
The depicted ore space is on the edge of the
placement area, so you only need to cover five
spaces around it to receive ore as a bonus.
 You receive your bonus all at the
same time.
Phase 11: Update and Add New Mountain Strips
Mountain strips provide building resources that you can get
during the action phase (see the Mountain and Trading Actions
on page 15).
Acquire your resources here.
 In this phase, remove the leftmost building resource (i.e. closest
to the arrow) from each face-up mountain strip and return it to
the general supply.
If all spaces but the last 2 silver space are empty, remove the
two silver and the entire mountain strip.
 Then turn a new mountain strip face up and place the depicted
goods on it. (This way there can be more face-up mountain strips
than at the start of the game.)
At the left, the mountain strip at the top is about to be removed.
At the right, the mountain strip at the bottom has just been
added.
 In the 4-player long game, there are not enough mountain strips
for all 7 rounds. You simply do not add any in round 7.
Phase 12: Remove Placed Vikings from the Action Board
Return your Vikings from the action board to your Thing Square.
(Then proceed with phase 1 of the next round.)
Tip for experienced players: if you place goods tiles in your placement area before the income phase, you will
then receive silver that you can use right away to possibly get bonuses as well. (For instance, the silver that
enabled the ore bonus in the example above could have been silver the player received that round.)
The player whose home board is
shown to the left would receive
1 mead, 1 wood, 1 stone, and 1 ore
each round.
12 Anytime Actions
There is a variety of actions you can take literally at any time
during the game (usually even during a main action).
Placing Goods on the Home Board
As mentioned several times before, at any time, you can place
green craft products and blue luxury goods as well as silver coins
and ore tokens on empty spaces in the placement area of your
home board, according to the following rules:
The spaces with the big numbers (0, 1, 2, 3, ) form the
income diagonal (see Income on page 9). You can only
cover a space in the income diagonal if you also cover (or have
already covered) all spaces:
 to the left of that space,
 below that space,
 as well as all spaces in the square to the bottom left of
the space.
Spaces with goods symbols are considered covered already.
 The placement areas depict growing squares in order to remind
you of these placement rules.
 Green tiles cannot be orthogonally adjacent to other
green tiles (diagonal adjacency is allowed). (An
illustration on your home board reminds you of that.)
 Blue tiles can be adjacent to other blue tiles, as can silver coins
to other silver coins, and ore tokens to other ore tokens.
 When you place a goods tile, you cannot place it on top of
another goods tile that is already there (not even partially). You
can, however, cover spaces with goods symbols (see Bonus on
page 7). Keep in mind, goods spaces are considered covered
already
 Each goods tile you place must be placed within the bounds of
the placement area.
The home board has three
additional spaces at the top
right, so that you can place
bigger tiles like the treasure
chest during the end game.
Here is an example of how to cover the spaces in the top right
corner without covering the income spaces that you are not
allowed to cover.
In the early game, you can cover
3 numbers with a single tile (here:
using a robe). (Unfortunately, if
you do, you will also cover the
mead space, losing a potential
mead bonus.)
In the example depicted
to the left, you could
place a skin and
bones or  wool tile
to cover income spaces
3 and 4 at the
same time, because by
doing so all required
spaces will also be
covered.
Occasionally, players will ignore this rule
unintentionally. If you notice the mistake
too late, see page 23 for a way to handle
that.
To avoid negative points, you are explicitly
allowed to place goods tiles wherever you
like in the placement area, as long as you
do not cover income spaces that you are
not allowed to cover (see the example
below).
Placing Goods on the Exploration Boards
As with the home board: at any time, you may place green craft
products and blue luxury goods as well as silver coins and ore
tokens on empty spaces of the exploration boards, according to
the same rules.
A lot of goods spaces on the exploration boards are surrounded
by less than 8 other spaces, which makes it easier to enclose them
for the bonus.
To unlock the rune stone and ore bonus on Bear Island, you only
need to cover six spaces.
Placing Goods on the House Tiles
At any time, you may place orange farm goods, red animal
products, green craft products, and blue luxury goods as well as
silver coins on empty spaces of your houses.
Orange tiles cannot be orthogonally adjacent to other orange tiles,
and red tiles cannot be orthogonally adjacent to other red tiles
(diagonal adjacency is allowed, as shown in the illustration on
the house tiles). Note that you cannot cover the pillar spaces in the long house.
The following applies to all of the anytime actions:
Once you place a goods tile on a board or house, you cannot take
it back.
You may, of course, test tile placements in order to plan ahead, as
long as you take them back before continuing.
Buying Ships
At any time, you may buy a ship by paying its cost in silver. The
cost of a ship is equal to its value (also depicted on the supply
board for ships). Instead of buying ships, you may build them
with wood by using a Ship Building action space (see page 15).
 The whaling boats are small boats.
 Knarrs and longships are considered large ships.
Each ship you acquire must be placed in your bay, on a landing
stage of appropriate size (you cannot place whaling boats on the
larger spaces).
Changing Silver
At any time, you may make change with your silver
coins. Silver comes in denominations of 1 silver,
2 silver, 4 silver, and 10 silver.
Arming
At any time (including immediately before, but not during an
action), you may place ore from your supply on the designated
spaces of your whaling boats and longships.
You may not take back the ore you place on your ships.
Although you cannot take back tiles once
you placed them, we still recommend
you place as many as you can before the
income and bonus phases. Especially the
large tiles as they belong on the boards
and not in your supply.
Note that there might be spaces in the
center of an exploration board that
you are not allowed to cover with
goods, like the 5 on Bear Island.
These spaces have a very prominent
green border.
Each whaling boat costs 3 silver,
each knarr 5 silver, and
each longship 8 silver.
The silver coins are designed such that
you can place them in the placement areas
and houses.
Longship are used for raiding and pillaging
(see pages 17 - 18).
Whaling boats are used for whaling (see
page 18). They show 1 preprinted ore and
provide space for 1 more ore.
The knarr costs 5 silver.
14 Occupations
Many occupations provide actions you can take at any time. (see
page 21).
The blue background color indicates an anytime action on an
occupation card.
Giving Away
You cannot simply give away or discard goods, ships, boards, or
cards outside of an action.
The Action Spaces
The action board features a variety of action spaces. (How and
when to use them has been explained in the Phase 5: Actions
section on page 9.)
General rule:
Some actions require you to have a specific type of ship. You may
use the same ship multiple times per round for different actions.
Example: You have a single longship in your bay. With this ship,
you can
 head out on a raid first
 then explore Newfoundland,
 and emigrate that same round.
Production spaces
On the green spaces of the action board,
you receive exactly what is depicted,
e.g., 1 stockfish.
In particular:
Here, you receive 1 milk if you have
1 cattle, 2 milk if you have 2 cattle, and
3 milk if you have 3 or more cattle.
Here, you receive 1 wool if you have
1 sheep, 2 wool if you have 2 sheep, and
3 wool if you have 3 or more sheep.
Here, you receive 1 spices and 1 silver.
Additionally, you receive 2 milk if you
have at least 1 cattle, and 1 wool if you
have at least 1 sheep.
On this space, you receive wood and ore
from the general supply. While you only
ever get 1 ore here, you also get 1 wood
per player: in a 1/2/3/4 player game, this is
1/2/3/4 wood.
In general:
If a good costs silver, the price is printed
below a purse icon at the left of the action
space. 1 cattle and 1 milk cost a total of
3 silver.
All the actions mentioned in the example
above are explained on the following
pages. Most action spaces (like the
production spaces) have a rather simple
effect, so we will explain those first.
Tip: Most new players overrate the Weekly Market. Your Vikings are well provided for during the harvests.
Usually, you will not need much more food than that.
On the other hand, they tend to overlook the long-term potential of animal breeding.
Exchange Spaces
The dark yellow action spaces relate to house building, ship
building, and crafting. On these, you exchange something (usually
building resources from your supply) for something else, but only
once. In particular:
On the action space at the top left of the
game board, you can pay 2 wood to receive
a shed (see page 13 for what it does).
Here, you may build a stone house and long house for 1 and
2 stone, respectively (see page 13 for what they do).
Note that the number of shed and house tiles is limited.
Here, you may build the indicated ship (and only that ship) for
1 or 2 wood:
The number of ships is not limited. The only limitation is the
number of landing stages in your bay: you can only have up to
3 whaling boats and up to 4 large ships (knarrs, longships).
On this space, you can choose what to get
for 2 stone and 2 wood: either you take
a stone house and a longship, or a long
house and a knarr.
Here, you may exchange an orange flax
tile for the larger and more valuable green
linen tile.
On this space, you may spend green hide
and linen tiles to make clothing, for
which you also receive 2 silver.
At the Smithy, you may spend 1 ore to
receive a blue tile with a forge tongs
symbol.
Jewelry tiles show a forge tongs symbol 
 as well as all the special tiles on dark blue spaces.
Here, you receive 4 silver. Additionally,
you may exchange a green wool tile for
a robe tile, and/or a blue silverware
tile for a jewelry tile.
On these three action spaces, you can exchange stone and/or wood
or ore for blue rune stone and chest tiles. On the first two of
these spaces, you also receive 1 silver.
Playing a single occupation costs 1 stone
or 1 ore, and you receive 1 silver (see
also Occupation on page 20).
Here, you may exchange a whaling boat* for
a knarr (if you wish), before using that knarr
or another large ship to emigrate (more on
emigration on page 17).
* If the whaling boat you exchange has ore
on it, you lose that ore.
Mountain and Trading Actions
Mountain Actions
Some of the golden brown action spaces allow you to take
building resources and silver from mountain strips.
When taking resources from a mountain strip, always
take them from left to right (i.e., goods closest to the
arrow first).
The 2 silver at the right are considered a single
item. After taking the last 2 silver, remove the
mountain strip from the game.
The Take 2 Building Resources action
allows you to take (up to) 2 items from one
mountain strip of your choice.
You may choose a mountain strip with fewer resources than you
are allowed to take (you may not take resources from another
mountain strip to make up for it).
The Take 3+2 Building Resources action
allows you to take (up to) 3 items from one
mountain strip and (up to) 2 items from another
mountain strip. You may not take 5 resources
from the same mountain strip.
For instance, you could take 3 wood from one mountain strip, and
an ore and the silver from another.
The Take 2+2+2+2 Building Resources
action allows you to take (up to) 2 items
each from (up to) four mountain strips.
Here, you cannot take 4 or 6 items from
one mountain strip.
16 Trading Actions
The other golden brown action spaces allow you to exchange
goods in your supply for more valuable ones.
The 1 Good action allows you to exchange exactly 1 goods
tile for the next more valuable one: either an orange for a red one,
or a red for a green one, or a green for a blue one. The old and
new tile must have the same shape and dimensions.
For example, you could use a
1 Good action to exchange
game meat for skin and bones
once.
The 2 Goods action allows you to
exchange up to 2 goods tiles for the next
more valuable one. Both tiles may be of the
same type, but you may not upgrade a
single tile twice (from orange to green, or
from red to blue).
The 2 Goods action allows you
to upgrade 2 goods twice: you may
exchange an orange good for a green one,
or a red good for a blue one. (In addition,
you also take 4 resources from one
mountain strip.)
Other action spaces on the game action board allow you to
exchange more than 2 goods.
One of the action spaces described here
also provides 4 weapon cards. This means
you draw 4 random weapons (and place
them face up in front of you).
Blue, yellow, red, and brown action spaces are special. Blue
stands for overseas trading, yellow for emigration, red for hunting,
raiding, and pillaging. Brown is the color of occupation cards.
Knarr Action Spaces
Blue is the color of action spaces that require a knarr, providing
blue luxury goods for trade.
Overseas Trading
The two Overseas Trading action spaces are located in the first and
second column of the action board. On overseas trading spaces, you
can pay 1 silver to turn any number of different green goods tiles to
their blue side. To do so, however, you must have at least one knarr
in your bay.
 Green tiles in the placement areas of your boards may not be
turned to their blue sides (you may not bypass the rule that
disallows the placement of green tiles next to each other).
Special Sale
The Special Sale action space is located in the third column of
the action board.
Each special tile shows a silver cost. If you have at
least one knarr, you can buy (up to) 2 special tiles
by paying their cost. (The English Crown is the only
special tile that may not be bought. We did ask Her
Majesty Queen Elizabeth II when she was in Frankfurt
on June 25th, 2015. She rejected our request in her
usual polite manner.)
The Glass Beads cost nothing; the Helmet
costs 1 silver.
Before you exchange your goods for more
valuable ones via Goods actions,
check how many and which goods you will
need for the Feast phase. We recommend
you place those goods on the Banquet
Table during the action phase ahead
of time.
In this example, during a single Overseas Trading action, you may turn
1 oil, 1 hide, 1 wool, 1 linen, and 1 clothing to their blue sides. (The other linen
tile must remain on its green side.)
Emigration
Yellow is the color of emigration. On Emigration action spaces,
you may turn a knarr or a longship* in your possession to its back
side and place it on the leftmost space of your Banquet Table.
This tile is no longer a ship, but it reduces the amount of food you
have to serve during a feast (see page 10).
The next time you emigrate, place the second ship to the right of
the first one. As you can see, each time you emigrate, you need
less food for the feast. In this example, the next feast will only
require covering 5 spaces.
 To take this action, you must pay an amount of silver equal to
the current round.
 In the very rare case that you emigrated so frequently that there
is no more space for another ship on the Banquet Table, you
cannot take the emigration action anymore.
* You lose the ore on the longship, if any.
Raiding, Pillaging, and Hunting
Red action spaces provide actions that require you to roll a die.
The orange eight-sided die is used on
action spaces that depict an orange die
symbol. The same applies to the blue
twelve-sided die on action spaces with a
blue die symbol.
In general:
When raiding (with the orange die) and pillaging (with the blue
die), you want to roll high.
On spaces with a die symbol at the top of the action board, you
want to roll low.
In each case, you may roll the die up to three times. (Each re-roll
invalidates the previous roll.) You can stop rolling at any time.
When finished (and after modifying the roll, if need be), announce
your battle result. Then declare your die action a success or
failure.
The following action spaces are each followed by an example.
Raiding
To take a Raiding action, you must have at
least one longship. It does not matter whether
or not there is ore on the ship (see Anytime
Actions on page 12), because you may not
use it for this action anyway.
Success
Every blue goods tile has a
sword value. After you roll the
orange eight-sided die, you can
take exactly one blue goods tile
with a sword value equal to or
lower than you rolled.* Each
stone and long sword weapon
card you spend increases your
die roll by 1 (even above 8). This
modified value is considered
your battle result.
Failure
Your raid automatically
fails if your battle result
is 5 or less.
Regardless of the
result, you may
willingly declare your
raid a failure. Upon
failure, you receive a
consolatory 1 stone and
1 long sword**** from
the general supply.
You do not lose any Vikings in the process
of emigration. (Your Viking figures
represent the leaders of your tribes, and
they would never abandon you.)
At the left of the Raiding action space, there are stone
and sword symbols. These symbols serve two purposes.
 They show which goods and weapons you may spend to
increase your roll.
 They remind you of the consolation prize you receive upon
failure.
The symbols on the Pillaging and Hunting action spaces
are to be treated the same way.
Sword value
18 Example of a Failed Raiding Attempt
You have a longship and take a Raiding action.
The amount of ore on your longship is irrelevant,
because you may not use it for raiding anyway. You
take the orange die and roll 4 on your first roll, and 5 on the
second. You want to do better, but you only roll 3 on your final
roll. If you spend 2 stone and 1 long sword, the most you could
get would be a battle result of 6, which is a rune stone. You
decide it is better to declare the raid a failure and take your
consolatory 1 stone and 1 long sword.
Pillaging
As with Raiding, you want to roll high when pillaging.
To do so, you must have a longship. If you have more than one
longship, you must use the longship with the most ore on it.
Success
When pillaging, add 1 to
your dice roll for each ore
on your longship (even
above 12), keeping the
ore. After you roll the blue
twelve-sided die, you can
take exactly one blue goods
tile with a sword value
equal to or lower than you
rolled.* You can spend stone
and long swords from your
supply to increase the roll
by 1 per item spent. This
modified value is considered
your battle result.
Failure
Your raid automatically
fails if your battle result is
5 or less. You may willingly
declare it a failure, regardless
of the result.
Upon failure, you receive
a consolatory 1 stone and
1 long sword**** from the
general supply. Additionally,
after each failed pillaging
attempt, you may return
1 Viking from the respective
action space to your Thing
Square and use it again later
that round.
The English Crown has the highest sword
value and is worth 2 points.
At the bottom left of the Pillaging action spaces,
you can see a Viking symbol and an arrow pointing
left. This is a reminder of the consolatory Viking you
receive upon failure.
* When taking a blue goods tile, you can take a regular blue tile
or one of the special tiles (on the oval supply board).
Example of a Successful Pillaging Attempt
You have a longship and 2 ore on it. You have 1 ore in your
supply, which you decide to place on the longship before you
take a Pillaging action. You take the blue die and roll 4 on
your first roll. You could stop here, but you want to do better.
Your second roll is 6. Since you only have one roll left, you
decide to stop right here. You spend 1 long sword for a final
battle result of 10: 6 from the roll, 3 from the ore on your
longship, and 1 from the long sword. With that battle result,
you take 1 Jewelry goods tile.
Hunting Game, Laying a Snare and Whaling
When hunting game and laying a snare, you roll the orange eight-sided
die. When whaling, you roll the blue twelve-sided die. In all
of these cases, you want to roll low.
Success
When hunting, laying snares,
and whaling, reduce the
value of your roll by one for
each ore (even preprinted
ore) on the whaling boat(s)
you are using to perform the
action (you keep the ore).
This can lead to a negative
value; any negative value
is treated as a 0. Pay a
number of wood or proper
weapons** equal to this
value to declare a successful
action and receive the reward
depicted on the action
space.***
Failure
If you declare your hunting
attempt a failure, you do not
have to pay anything. (You
may not declare a result of 0
as a failure.)
Upon failure, you receive
a consolatory 1 wood and
1 weapon**** of the proper
type** from the general
supply. Additionally, when
you fail laying a snare, you
may return 1 Viking from
the action space to your
Thing Square. When you
fail whaling, you may even
return 2 Vikings. You may
use the returned Vikings
again later that round.
Let us talk a little bit about the luck factor in this game. Rolling
dice is frowned upon in development gameswith good
reason. In this game, failure is designed such that it is only
marginally worse than, for example, taking 2 stone (compared
to stone and long sword) or 2 wood (see failure in the next
section) from a mountain strip. When you fail,
your next roll is more likely to succeed. Bad
rolls do not prevent success, they just delay it
a little. For me, it is an essential part of the
game to provide that feeling of adventure.

** These are bow and arrow, snare, and spear for hunting
game, laying a snare, and whaling, respectively.
*** For hunting game, you receive 1 hide and 1 game meat.
For laying a snare, you receive 1 fur and 1 snare weapon
card. For whaling, you receive 1 oil, 1 skin and bones
tile, and 1 whale meat.
Example of a Failed Game Hunting Attempt
You take a Hunting Game action. Since the Hunting
Game action space in the first column is already taken, you
place 2 Vikings on the Hunting Game action space in the
second column. You take the orange die and try to roll low.
Your first roll is 3, but you are not happy about it. So you try
again and roll 7, which is way too high. Your third roll is 4.
If you spent, for instance, 2 wood and
2 bow and arrow weapon cards, you
could declare the hunt a success, but you
decide that the cost is too high. So you
declare your attempt a failure and receive
your consolatory 1 wood and 1 bow and
arrow weapon card. (Even though you
failed, you do not receive a Viking back.
You would only receive one back after a
failed Laying a Snare attempt, which works much the same
as Hunting Gamethe only difference being that you would
use snares instead.)
**** When you receive a consolatory weapon card (for failing)
or a reward snare (for successfully laying a snare), take
this weapon from the face up discard pile. If you cannot
find one in there, look through the draw pile and take it
from there. Then shuffle the draw pile.
2 (your die roll) minus
2 (ore on the ship)
equals a result of 0.
If your battle result is 0, you may not declare the attempt a failure.
You must stop immediately, and you may not re-roll.
At the bottom left of the Whaling action spaces, you
can see two Viking symbols and an arrow pointing left.
This reminds you of the 2 consolatory Vikings you can
return to your Thing Square on failure.
Peculiarities of Whaling
There are two different Whaling action spaces.
On the major Whaling action space
(at the left), you can use one to three
of your whaling boats. In column 4 (at
the right), there is a minor Whaling
action space, on which you can only use
a single whaling boat.
Example of a Successful Whaling Attempt
You have 2 whaling boats, each equipped with 1 additional ore.
Before you take the Whaling action in the third column of
the action board, you decide to purchase another whaling boat,
but you have no ore to place on it. You take the blue die and
roll 8 on your first roll. If you stopped right here, you would
have to pay 3 spears/wood to be successful, because the 5 ore
on your whaling boats would reduce the 8 to 3. So you roll
again, rolling 4 on your second roll. Subtracting 5 from that
results in a negative value, which is treated as a 0. Since your
roll resulted in 0, you must stop immediately and declare your
attempt a success.
The Plundering action space is also
considered a red action space. Here, you can
extort ransom money in the form of a blue
silver hoard goods tile without battlebut
you must have at least two longships to do so.
When given the choice to spend a weapon
instead of wood, spend the weapon. As
with real life, wood is more versatile than
weapons.
You may wonder why whaling with 3 whaling boats only
requires 3 Vikings, while whaling with a single whaling boat
requires 4. The latter is only a minor action space, meaning it
is intended for players for whom whaling is just a side project,
since they have so few whaling boats.
Similarly, there are two types of action spaces
that require a longship. Pillaging works best
with longships that are equipped with lots
of ore. Raiding and Plundering can be done
with longships that are low on ore.
EXPLORATION:
Orange is the color of exploration. By exploring, you may
add exploration boards to your home board to gain additional
placement areas. There are four unique exploration boards
which side faces up depends on the current round (see phase 3
of a round on page 8). When taking an exploration action, place
the required number of Vikings on the action space and take the
corresponding exploration board.
If there is silver on the exploration board you claim, place it in
your supply.
The exploration boards are explained in detail on page 15 of the
appendix.
 In order to take Shetland or Faroe Islands
exploration board, you must have a whaling
boat, knarr, or longship, and you must place
1 Viking. This is only possible on the action
space requiring 1 Viking.
 Iceland, Greenland, and Bear Island
each require a knarr or longship, as well as
2 Vikings.
 Places on the American continent (Baffin
Island, Labrador, and Newfoundland)
each require 3 Vikings and a longship.
In all of the above cases, you keep the ship you explore with.
Occupation
You start the game with a single light brown occupation card (see
Setup), which you keep hidden in your hand. During the game,
you will receive additional dark brown occupation cards. You
must play an occupation card before you can use its effect (see
also the following section About the Occupation Card Effects).
On this action space, you draw a random dark
brown occupation card from the draw pile
and put it into your hand. Additionally, you
receive 1 silver.
Here, you may pay 1 stone or 1 ore to play an
occupation card from your hand. Additionally,
you receive 1 silver.
Here, you may play up to 2 occupation cards
from your hand, one after another.
On this action space, you may play up to
4 occupation cards from your hand, one
after another. (An interesting interaction
between this action space and another rule
is explained below.)
Bonus for Placing Three Vikings
Each time you place the three required Vikings on an action space
in the third column, before taking the action, you receive a dark
brown occupation card from the draw pile into your hand. You
may look at that card immediately. (This bonus is only available
on action spaces in the third column.)
The previously mentioned action space is located in the third
column. It is the only action space, on which you may draw an
occupation card and play it right away.
Bonus for Placing Four Vikings
Each time you place the four required Vikings on an action space in
the fourth column, before or after taking the action, you may play an
occupation card from your hand. (This bonus is only available on
action spaces in the fourth column.)
 You can use the effect of the played card immediately.
 If you do not have any occupation cards left in your hand, you
cannot play one, obviously.
Extension Tiles in the 4-Player Game
The grey action spaces on the extension tiles allow you to use
an action space in the same column that is occupied by another
player. (You cannot imitate unoccupied action spaces or those
occupied by your Vikings.) In each 4-player game, only two
of the four columns feature imitation: either the first or second
column, and either the third or fourth column. This is determined
at random during setup.
In this example, the second and third column feature imitation.
 Like the other action spaces, imitation action spaces can only be
used once per round.
About the Occupation Card Effects
Every occupation card has the same layout. Its name is at the top
left, its point value at the top right, and its effect at the bottom.
The Slash
Several card effects use a slash (/) in their description.
Basically, the slash stands for eitheror, but we
would like to illustrate its use with some examples:
The Tradesman lets you exchange 1 silverware for
either 1 chest or 1 silk.
If a card has multiple elements with slashes (/), these
elements relate to each other in their respective order.
Here, you can choose whether you want to spend 2, 4, or 6
silver to receive 1, 2, or 3 hides, respectively.
It is important that you only choose at most one of
the listed elements. This card provides either 1 bean,
1 grain, or 1 cabbage, depending on whether you have
1, 2, or 3 whaling boats, respectively.
Consequently, if you have 2 whaling boats, you receive grain and
no beans. (You could argue that 2 boats also include 1 boat, but
this is not the case in this game.)
Every occupation card belongs to one of the following categories:
Immediate Cards
You can recognize immediate cards by their yellow background
color. These cards have an immediate and one-time only effect
that you must carry out when you play them. After that, the effect
becomes irrelevant. Only the point value will matter,
namely for scoring. For example, when you play the
Dragonslayer, you can immediately exchange 2 snares
and 2 spears for 1 treasure chest.
The grey arrow on immediate cards indicates that you
cannot do the exchange at any time, but only immediately
and at most once. (For instance, you could not exchange 4 snares
and 4 spears for 2 treasure chests.) You can only do an exchange
multiple times if a card explicitly says so, using terms like
multiple times or once per .
Apart from exchange actions, some cards allow you to
take specific actions on the action board or go through
specific round phases. The Cattle Breeder lets you go
through an additional Animal Breeding phase just
by yourself.
In other cases, you simply receive goods without
having to pay anything.
Anytime Cards
You can recognize anytime cards by their blue
background color. These cards have a permanent
effect. You can do what is stated on the card at any time
(before scoring) and any number of times. The Tanner
lets you exchange 1 salt meat for 1 hide at any time.
The yellow arrow on anytime cards indicates that you
can do the exchange at any time and any number of
times during the course of the game.
There are some anytime cards without a yellow arrow.
These bend the rules for you. The Modifier allows
you to take ore from your ships back into your supply
(which is not normally allowed).
Each Time Cards
You can recognize each time cards by their red background color.
These cards have two differently shaded parts. The light red part
states when the effect activates (usually in form of a condition),
the dark red one explains the action you may then take.
Consequently, you may take the action each time the
condition is met. Immediately before each time you use
an Overseas Trading action space (light red part), you
receive 1 oil (dark red part).
Some cardslike the Priestexplicitly state whether the
card comes into effect before or after you meet the condition.
(The Priest, for instance, gives you the oil before the action,
in case you wish to use the oil right away during the Overseas
Trading action.)
Other cards provide exchange actions or bend the
rules for you. The Proficient Hunter lets you roll up to
4 times instead of 3.
Exchange actions on each time cards are represented by a
grey arrow (as on immediate cards), because the exchange
cannot be done at any time. However, some cards can say multiple
times or once per  to modify that.
Some cards provide two actions. When you play such a card, you can
choose which actions you want to take.
If a card shows two immediate actions and you decide
to take both, you must carry them out in order. Here
you would have to hunt game first, then you could lay
a snare.

when rolling
If you only intend to use cards from deck A for now, you can skip
the following section. Only decks B and C contain as soon as
cards.
As Soon As Cards
 You can recognize as soon as cards by their green background
color. Like the each time cards, these cards have two differently
shaded parts. The light green part states when the effect activates
(usually in form of a condition), the dark green one explains the
action you can then take. In this, these cards are no different
from each time cards.
The difference is that the effect of an as soon as card activates
only once per gamenamely when the condition is met for the
first time. This could be the moment you play the card or a future
point in time.

if your total round
income is at most:
The Sail Patcher requires 3 large ships. If you already
have 3 large ships when playing this card, you can use
its effect immediately.

This card explicitly states a future point in time. As
soon as you acquire your next knarr, you immediately
receive 1 stockfish and 1 silver for each knarr you
then have.
If the above does not answer all of your questions about specific
card effects, please refer to page 2 of the appendix. It explains all
of the occupations in alphabetical order.
Running Out of Components
For now, you can skip the following section. Come back to it if
you run out of components.
 There are only a few components that are limited by the provided
amounts.
Houses: There is a limited number of sheds and houses in the
game. If you run out, you may not take any more of those tiles.
Exploration boards: Since there are only four exploration
boards, players may only explore up to four times during the
course of the game.
 Ships, goods tiles, building resources, and weapon cards are
considered to have an unlimited supply.
Ships: Improvise if you run out of a certain type of ship.
Goods tiles: If you run out of goods, you could return goods to
the general supply from sections of your placement areas that have
already been fully covered. You can then either cover them with
other goods or silver, or simply remember they were already covered.
Building resources: In case you run out of building resources,
look at the back sides of the seven Thing Penalty tiles and take
the appropriate one as replacement.
This tile stands for 5 stone.
Weapon cards: When the draw pile runs out of cards, shuffle the
discard pile and form a new face down draw pile. If you are about
to receive a consolatory weapon and you cannot find a proper one
in both the discard and draw pile, proceed as with the building
resources. Each penalty tile is worth 3 weapons of one kind.
End of the Game and Scoring
The game ends immediately after the Feast phase of the final
round. You do not receive any bonus during the final round.
 If you have sheds or stone houses, you can place wood and
stone left in your supply on the designated spaces of those tiles.
(The tiles show you exactly how many they require.)
 If you have goods tiles left in your supply, you can still place
them in the placement areas of your boards and houses,
if possible.
Then score your points using the provided scoring pad.
The player whose possessions are worth the most wins the game.
The points values of your boards and tiles are printed on the
shield icons.
In case of a tie, there are multiple winners.
Positive Points
 Ships: each whaling boat is worth 3 points, each knarr 5 points, and
each longship 8 points.
 Emigrations: each knarr used for emigration is worth 18 points,
each such longship 21 points.
 Exploration: The Exploration boards vary in value (4 to 38
points). Their value is printed in the top right corner.
 Sheds and houses: sheds are worth 8 points, stone houses 10
points, and long houses 17 points, as printed in the top right corner.
2233
 Sheep and cattle: each sheep is worth 2 points (3 points if
pregnant), each cattle is worth 3 points (4 points if pregnant).
 Occupations: the value of your occupation cards is printed in
the top right corner. Only occupation cards in play count.
 Silver: determine the total of silver in your supply. Silver on
your boards is worthless.
 Final income: do not pay out the income of the final round;
instead, write it down in the Final Income category of the
scoring pad.
 The player who owns the English Crown special tile receives
2 additional points, regardless of whether it is in their supply or
on one of their boards.
Negative Points
 From your total of positive points, subtract the negative points
for your boards and buildings, including your home board and
exploration boards as well as your sheds and houses.
Also, do not forget your Thing Penalties, if any (see Phase 9:
Feast on page 11).
 It may occur that a player places goods tiles adjacent to each other
even though they were not allowed to do so. Correct the mistake
immediately when that happens. If you notice a mistake too late,
you can punish the culprit during the scoring with 1 Thing Penalty
for each wrongly placed pair of tiles. Here are 2 examples:
In the example on the left, a player has
placed three green goods in a row, so
there are two green-green pairs. This is
punishable by two Thing Penalties for a
total of -6 points.
In the example on the right, the mistake
is more severe. The three goods have
been placed such that any two of them
are adjacent to each other. So there
are three green-green pairs, which is
punishable by three Thing Penalties for
a total of -9 points.
THE SOLO GAME:
In the solo game, use whichever side of the home board you like.
You will need a second set of Vikings of a different color.
 Place 1 Viking (2 Vikings in the short game) of one color (here:
red) on round space 1 at the Banquet Table, and another
2 Vikings each on spaces 3, 5, and 7 (the latter only in the long
game).
 Place 2 Vikings of the other color (here: yellow) each on round
spaces 2, 4, and 6.
 Place 5 Vikings of the first color (red) on the Thing Square,
and 5 Vikings (6 Vikings in the short game) of the other color
(yellow) on the waiting space of your home board.
 Remove the remaining Viking of the second color from the
game. (In the short game, remove 1 Viking of the first color
instead.)
Play the game as though it were a multiplayer game, taking one
turn after another. Since you do not have any opponents, leave the
Vikings from the previous round on the game action board, blocking
the action spaces. This is why you have Vikings of two colors.
Course of a Round:
Play the first round as in the multiplayer game. In phase 12, do
not take any Vikings from the action board. Instead, move the 5
Vikings of the other color from the waiting space to the Thing
Square. In round 2, you receive 2 additional Vikings of the other
color. At the end of round 2, leave the Vikings you placed in round
2 on the action board and return the Vikings from the first round to
your home board. Place these Vikings in round 3. Continue play
in this fashion until the final round.
Notes on the Phases of a Round:
 Once you are familiar with the solo game, you can skip phase 3.
If you would like to know which exploration boards are available
in any given round, check the appendix on page 15. It will also
tell you how big the reward for exploring a specific board is.
 Always skip phase 6. (You have the privilege to always be the
first player.)
 In phase 12, you can look at the Banquet Table to see which
Vikings you must remove from the action board.
A final score of 100 is considered a very good score for the solo game.
In the long game, you can get there with experience, but in the short
game this is rather difficult to achieve. If you like the challenge, be our
guest and beat it. (Due to the blocking Vikings, the solo game usually
has lower scores than the multiplayer game.)
If you like, you can look through the
light brown occupation cards and choose
one for the start of the game, instead of
drawing one at random. This way you can
explore specific aspects of the game.
In the solo game, I prefer to lay out more
mountain strips during setup than required.
I use a pencil to mark how many of those
mountain strips are available to me at each
time. This way I can go much quicker through
phase 11 and enjoy the game more.
CREDITS:
A Feast for Odin was published in June 2016 and designed in May 2013.
Extensive testing started in August 2014.
Frank Heeren organized the realization of this heavy game. Dennis Lohausen
was responsible for its illustrations and graphic design. Uwe Rosenberg wrote
the rules and also supervised the editing process of the game. Christof Tisch
typeset the occupation cards, Hans-Georg Schneider the rule book. Grzegorz
Kobiela did the elaborate English translation. His meticulous way of working led
to many linguistic improvements. The editing team would like to thank Gernot
Kpke for the historical accompanying texts, which were supplemented by
Uwe Rosenberg and translated to English by Gernot himself. Also many thanks
to the proof-readers of the rule book: Janina Kleinemenke, Gabriele Goldschmidt,
Grzegorz Kobiela, and Mario Wiese. Gernot would like to thank the proofreaders
of his accompanying texts: Kerstin Herdzina and Steffen Jost. Last but
not least many thanks to all play-testers, in chronologic order: Andreas Odendahl,
Lasse Goldschmidt, Gabriele Goldschmidt, Sascha Hendriks, Mechthild Kanz,
Reinhold Kanz, Kai Poggenkamp, Thorsten Roth, Janina Kleinemenke,
Jennifer Jnger, Marc Jnger, Hagen Dorgathen, Corinna Bttemeier,
Stephanie Michaelis, Petra Zardock, Anja Beduhn, Michael Speckmann,
Ingo Bckmann, Frank Heeren, Pan Pollack, Helge Ostertag, Jens Drgemller,
Thorsten Hanson, Stephan Rink, Christof Tisch, Dirk Schmitz, Kevin Farnworth,
Maxime Gauthier-Kwan, Anthony Gascon, Emily Berthelet, Klaus Lottmann,
Florian Racky, Ronny Vorbrodt, Rolf Raupach, Stefan Wahoff, Tanja Muck,
Peter Muck, Tim Koch, Christoph Post, Bianca Bartsch, Claudia Grldt,
Patrick Enger, Gabi Kpke, Gernot Kpke, Tanja Techmann, Torsten Techmann,
Lisa Hofmann, Markus Habenberger, Witold Kliszczynski, Raimund Kessler,
Jutta Bhm, Michael Gnade, Karola Khler, Lea Reinisch, Patrick Hoffbauer,
Dani Kemmler, Antonio Messina, Jrg Freudenstein, Kerstin Herdzina,
Ragnar Deist, Jrgen Dissinger, Dsire Hher, Andrea Neis, Stefan Ziemerle,
Oliver Heck, Sebastian Dames, Lisa Roggenbuck, Anna Birkelbach, Ralf Seifert.
Z-Man Games wishes to thank Patrick Korner, Adam Marostica, and Michael
Young for proofreading the epic-length documents of the grand journey that is
A Feast for Odin.
Special thanks to Andreas Ode Odendahl for his
crucial idea to implement bonuses. He had already
proved his outstanding aptitude for complex board
games with La Granja.




GAME NAME:
Power Grid

COMPONENTS:
- 1 two-sided board: Germany /U.S.A. with scoring track, player order and resource market
- 132 wooden houses in 6 colors: 22 per player
- 84 wooden resource tokens: 24 coal (brown), 24 oil (black), 24 garbage (yellow),
- 12 uranium (red)
-  money (in Elektro)
- 6 summary cards with order of play/payments
- 43 power plant cards: 42 power plants with numbers 0340, 42, 44, 46 and 50
- 1 Step 3 card
- rules sheet
GOAL:
Each player represents a power company, which works to supply electricity to cities. During the game, each player buys power plants at auction, buys resources to produce
electricity in those power plants, and builds a network of cities to supply with electricity from his power plants. In the end, the player who supplies the most cities with
power wins the game.
Preparation
1. Place the board in the middle of the table, choosing the side you wish to play on. The map is separated into 6 areas, each with 7 cities. In each game, the players
choose which areas they will play in. We recommend one area per player. Of course, the areas chosen must be adjacent. During the game, every player can play in
all the chosen areas.
2. Each player takes an overview card, the wooden houses of one color and 50 Elektro.
3. Each player places one of his houses left of the 1 on the scoring track and one on the player order. At the beginning of the game, players draw lots for player order.
4. The large spaces at the bottom of the board represent the resource market. At the beginning of the game, place 3 coal on spaces 1 to 8; 3 oil on spaces 3 to 8; and 3
garbage on spaces 7 and 8. None of these resources is ever placed on spaces 10 to 16. Place 1 uranium on each of the spaces 14 and 16. Thus, at the beginning of the
game, the cheapest coal costs 1 Elektro, the cheapest oil costs 3 Elektro, the cheapest garbage costs 7 Elektro and the cheapest uranium costs 14. During the game,
players will place new supplies of coal, oil, and garbage on spaces 1 to 8 (up to a maximum of three tokens of each per space), and a maximum of 1 uranium token
per space on spaces 1 to 16.
Power Plant 13
Actual Market
Future Market
Step 3 card
5. Place the remaining resources as a supply near the board.
6. Take the power plant cards numbered 03 to 10 and place them near the board in two horizontal rows. These power plants are an array of 2 x 4 cards (the power plant
market). In the upper row, place power plants numbered 03 to 06 in ascending order, left to right, beginning with the least expensive; this is the actual market. In the
lower row, place power plants numbered 07 to 10 in ascending order, left to right; this is the future market. When players add new power plants to the power plant
market, players rearrange all power plants in the power plant market in ascending order with the 4 cheapest plants in the actual market.
7. Remove the Step 3 card and the ecological power plant number 13 from the card deck, shuffle the remaining power plant cards, and place them face down as a
supply stack near the board. Place the Step 3 card face down under the stack and the ecological power plant number 13 face down on top of the stack.
Playing the game
The game is played over several rounds. Each round of the game has five phases. In each phase, all players take their actions in the order specified for the phase before the
game continues with the next phase. The five phases are:
1. Determine Player Order
2. Auction Power Plants
3. Buying Resources
4. Building
5. Bureaucracy
Phase 1: Determine Player Order
During this phase, the new player order is determined. The first player is the player with the most cities in his network (first house on the scoring track). If two or more players
are tied for the most cities, the first player is the player among them with the largest-numbered power plant. Place this players house in the first position in the player order
area. Determine the remaining player positions using the same rules.
Remember: At the beginning of the game draw lots for player order
Example: Anna already connected 6 cities, Dale and Angelika 5 and Valerie only 4. Anna is first player and places her house in the first position in the player order. Dale and
Angelika are tied and check their power plants. Dale owns the 17, Angelika the 15. So Dale is in second position and Angelika in third. Valerie finally places her house in fourth
place in the player order.
Phase 2: Auction Power Plants
In this phase, each player may have an opportunity to offer a power plant for sale at auction. During the phase, each player can buy at most one power plant. A player should
try to have plants with enough capacity to power all the cities in his network, but this is not required. The first player starts and chooses between:
a. Pass
b. Choose a power plant for auction
a. Pass
The player may choose not to start an auction and, instead pass. If he does so, he cannot bid in later auctions in this round and, thus, will not get a new power plant this round.
b. Choose a power plant for auction
The player chooses one power plant from the actual market (top row) and then makes a bid to purchase it (the player must bid at least the minimum bid (number of the
power plant), but may start with a higher bid. Continuing in clockwise order, the other players can make higher bids or pass. If a player passes, he may not re-enter the
current auction. Players keep bidding or passing until one player remains. He pays his highest bid to the bank and takes the power plant. Players then immediately draw
a new card to replace the card sold and place the new card in the market. They rearrange the power plants in ascending order: the four lowest in the actual market, the
four highest in the future market.
Important
> Once a player has purchased a power plant in a round, he cannot bid in another auction in the same round, nor can he offer a plant at auction.
> When the auctioning player wins the auction and gets the power plant, the next player in turn order takes his turn at offering a power plant for auction, if he has not
already purchased a power plant this round. If he has, the next player in turn order may start an auction, and so on. When a player other than the player who started
the auction wins the auction, the auctioning player may choose a new plant to auction from the actual market or pass.
> During the game each player can have only 3 power plants at any time. When a player buys a fourth plant, he must discard one of his other power plants. The player may
move resources from the discarded power plant to his remaining three power plants, if they match the resources used by one or more of the retained power plants. If
there is no capacity left or no matching power plant for the resources from the discarded plant, the player returns the resources to the supply (not the resource market).
> The last player to start an auction in a round can pay just the minimum bid to get the power plant, if he chooses to do so. This is an advantage to being last in this phase.
Exception: In the first round of the game, each player must buy a power plant.
> If, in later rounds, no power plant is sold in a round, the players remove the lowest numbered power plant from the market, placing it back in the box, and replace it by
drawing a power plant from the draw stack. They then rearrange the market according to the rules.
Exception: Because the player order is chosen randomly at the beginning of the game, the players re-determine the player order after auctioning the power plants (after
phase 2). As no player has any cities at this time, the new player order is determined solely by the numbers of the power plants (see phase 1).
coal oil garbage uranium
The game is played in 3 steps (starting with step 1). The steps are not divided into a specific number of
rounds. The game moves from Step 1 to Step 2 after the first player connected a certain number of
cities in his network. Step 3 begins after the Step 3 card is drawn. (see Steps of the game on page 7).
There are minor, but important, rules changes when moving from one step to the next. The game usually
ends in Step 3, but may end in Step 2.
Power Plant Cards
1. The number in the upper left corner is the number of the power plant. This number is also the
minimum acceptable bid when the plant is auctioned (figure: number and minimum bid of 14).
2. The picture in the middle shows the power plant and has no game related meaning.
3. The symbols in the lower left corner and the color of the bar show, how many resources of a type are
required to produce electricity with this plant (brown: coal, black: oil, yellow: garbage, red: uranium).
A player can never consume more or fewer resource tokens when using the power plant to produce
electricity. Every power plant can store twice as many resources as it needs to produce. In this example,
the power plant needs 2 garbage tokens and can store up to 4 garbage tokens.
4. The number in the house symbol indicates how many cities this power plant can supply with electricity.
In this example, the power plant uses exactly 2 garbage tokens and supplies up to 2 cities. A player
cannot choose to use just one garbage token with this power plant to supply one city. Although a
power plant can store twice as many resources as needed, it cannot produce power for twice as many
cities in a round.
Special Power Plants
Hybrid Power Plants: These power plants have a brown/black bar and have both coal and oil symbols. The owner of such a power plant
can choose to use coal and/or oil. Usually, players will choose the cheaper resource.
Example: The hybrid power plant 05 (see left) can use 2 coal, 2 oil or 1 coal and 1 oil.
Ecological and Fusion Power Plants: These power plants do not require any resources. They can supply up to the number of cities
shown in the house symbol.
Phase 3: Buying Resources
In this phase, the players can buy resources for their power plants from the resource market. A player can only buy resources for plants he owns. A plant cannot produce
electricity unless it has enough resources to be fully powered. This phase is played in reverse player order. The last player starts.
Every power plant can store twice as many resources as needed for production. Every power plant only stores the kind of resource it uses for production (a coal power plant
stores only coal, a hybrid power plant can store both coal and oil, an ecological power plant never stores resources, etc). Each player can buy resources up to the maximum
allowed in all his plants (twice as many as the production numbers of all his plants).
Example: The oil power plant 03 can store a maximum of 4 oil, the hybrid power plant 05 a maximum of 4 coal and/or oil in any combination. The ecological power plant 13
does not need any resources and because of that cannot store any resource tokens.
Players purchase the resources from the spaces of the resource market. The printed numbers in the resource spaces show the price for one resource token. The players pay
the amount owed to the bank. If one kind of resource is depleted, no more of this resource is available for purchase in the current round.
Important: At any time during the game, a player can rearrange his resources among his power plants if they are able to use the resources being placed on them.
Phase 4: Building
This phase is played in reverse player order. The last player starts. In this phase, the players start or add cities to their networks on the map. Remember, to win the
game a player must be able to power more cities than any other player. Thus, building a network of cities is essential to winning the game. However, the winner is
not necessarily the player with the most cities - it is the player with the most powered cities. Players must balance their power plants with their resources and their
networks to win the game.
At the beginning of the game, each player has no cities and, thus, no network. Each player starts his network by choosing any city (not already chosen by another player)
in the playing areas (chosen at the beginning of the game) on the map. To show that this city is part of his network, the player places one of his houses on the space
numbered 10 in this city. The player pays the building cost of 10 for the starting city. Depending on what step the game is in, the number of players who can have houses
in a city and the cost to build in a city changes (see Steps of the game below).
= coal = oil = garbage = uranium = hybrid coal/oil n o = ecological and fusion
symbol
All subsequent cities a player adds to his network must connect to at least one city already in his network (marked with one of his houses). The player needs only to pay
the connecting cost shown on the map (the paths between the new city and one of the cities already in his network) and the value of the lowest empty city space. When
connecting to a new city, the player chooses the cheapest connection berween the new andone of his own cities and pays the total costs to the bank. A player may connect
to any number of new cities in a round, as long as he can pay the building and connecting costs.
The following rules are valid for connecting cities to the players networks:
> In step 1 of the game, each city can only connected by one player, in step 2 by two players and in step 3 by three players. When adding the city the player pays 10 for
placing the first house in a city, 15 for placing the second house, and 20 for placing the third house additionally to the connection costs between the cities.
> A player may add any city (if there is room in the city for the player) to his network, regardless of its distance from his other cities. The player may build through a city
without placing a house there if he wants or (more likely) if there is no room in the city.
> A player may never connect to the same city twice.
> After connecting a city, the player places one of his houses in the new city on the lowest empty space (10, 15 or 20 Elektro).
> A player can only expand his network; he cannot start a second network on the map. A player always must pay all connecting and building costs, even if he already
used a connection earlier during the game.
> A city may only be connected to a mximum of three different networks (see below for the beginning of the different steps of the game).
Example:
Anna can expand her network from Duisburg to Essen for 10 Elektro
because there are no connecting costs between Duisburg and Essen.
To add Dortmund, she must pay 12 Elektro (10+2) if she uses the
cheaper connection from Mnster. To connect to Aachen the complete
costs are 21 Elektro (10+9+2), because she has to pay the connection
through Dsseldorf.
For Bob, the connection costs to Duisburg are also cheap. For 12
Elektro (10+2+0), he can build the connection through Essen.
If the game is in step 2, Anna can add Dsseldorf for 17 Elektro
(15+2) or Kln for 21 Elektro (15+2+4). In step 2, second houses in
cities are allowed (see Steps of the game below). If Anna adds both
Dsseldorf and Kln, she pays 36 Elektro. First, she adds Dsseldorf for
17 Elektro and, then, from there, she adds Kln for an additional 19
Elektro.
Important
> The players do not have to choose their starting cities in the first round. They can start their networks in later rounds to influence their positions in the playing order.
> When a player adds a new city to his network, he immediately updates his position on the scoring track so every player can see how many cities each player has.
> If, at any time during the game, there is a power plant in the actual market with a number equal to or lower than the number of cities any player has, players
immediately remove it from the game and replace it with a new card from the draw stack. This rule does not affect power plants owned by players.
Example: A player adds a city and now has 6 cities in his network. If the power plant numbered 06 is still in the actual power plant market, he removes it from the
game, but the players keep their power plants numbered 03 to 05. Then, he draws a new card from the draw stack, adding it to the power plant market, using the
normal rules for adding plants to the market. It is also possible that newly drawn power plants must be immediately discarded and a new card drawn.
Phase 5: Bureaucracy
In this phase, the players earn cash, re-supply the resource market, and remove a power plant from the power plant market, replacing it with a new one from the stack.
Earning cash: Starting with the first player, every player indicates how many cities in his network he wishes (and is able) to supply with electricity. He earns cash based on
the number of cities he powers as shown on the payment table. A player who does not supply any city gets 10 Elektro (the guaranteed minimum). The players remove the
required resources from the power plants that produced electricity this round and place the used resources in the resource supply next to the board. A player may choose
(or only be able) to supply fewer cities than he has in his network. The player is paid only for the supplied cities. If a player produces more electricity than he has cities in his
network, the surplus is wasted. Every player can choose how many and which of his power plants he uses, e.g. he does not have to supply all of his cities.
Payment Example:
Anna owns 6 cities and the power plants 07, 10 and 15, all of them store the maximum
number of resources. She removes 4 coal and 3 oil and produces electricity for 7 cities
(2+2+3). She earns 73 Elektro for 6 supplied cities. The surplus electricity is wasted.
Re-supply the resource market: Based on the number of players and the step of the game, the players re-supply the resource market (see table at the back of the rules)
from the supply of resources. They start placing the resources on the highest (most expensive) space lacking the maximum possible quantity of the appropriate resource.
Exception: Uranium must be refilled from space 16 and always only with one token in each space.
If there are not enough resources left in the supply, that resource is not fully re-supplied! This might happen, if the players store too many resources in their power plants.
The resource tokens in the game are limited.
Example:
In a game with 5 players, the following resources were bought in the first round: 10 coal, 2 oil, and 1 garbage. Thus, the resource market looks like this:
According to the table, the following resources are to be re-supplied for 5 players in step 1: 5 coal, 4 oil, 3 garbage, and 2 uranium. As there are only 4 coal tokens left
in the supply (the rest are stored on power plants), the players place only these four coal tokens: 1 on space 4 and 3 on space 3. The players place 2 oil tokens on space
3 and 2 oil tokens on space 2. The players place 1 garbage token on space 7 and 2 garbage tokens on space 6. They place 1 uranium token each on spaces 12 and 10.
Compared to the first round there is now a higher price for coal (now 3 Elektro), but oil is cheaper (now only 2 Elektro).
Update the power plant market: Place the highest numbered power plant from the future market face down under the draw stack and draw a new one to replace it.
Rearrange the market appropriately (see phase 2: this will change in Step 3, see the steps of the game). Because of this, the highest numbered power plants are collected
under the Step 3 card and become available during step 3 in the game.
Phase 5 and the whole round are now complete. A new round starts with phase 1.
The Steps of the Game
This chapter describes the different rules changes for the three steps. Step means the different gaming steps during the game, phase means the 5 phases in one round.
Step 1
The game starts. In step 1, every city can have only one house. The building cost for the first house is 10 Elektro. The resource table on the back of the rules shows the
re-supply numbers for step 1.
Step 2
Step 2 starts before phase 5 (bureaucracy) after a player has built his 7th city during phase 4 (Building). It can be that several players will build their 7th cities in the same
round or a player may have built more than 7 cities in this round.
To start step 2, remove ONCE the lowest numbered power plant from the game and replace it with a new one from the draw stack, rearranging the market as always.
From now on in step 2, two players can have houses in each city. The building price for the second connection is 15 Elektro. Please check the tables for the changed
re-supply of resources for step 2.
Step 3
When the Step 3 card is drawn from the draw stack, step 3 begins at the beginning of the subsequent phase of the game. This can happen in one of three ways:
1. If the Step 3 card is drawn in phase 2 (Auction Power Plants), treat the card as the highest power plant and place it at the end of the future market. Immediately
shuffle the draw stack with the remaining power plants (the power plants that were placed under the draw stack during steps 1 and 2 of the game), and place it face
down next to the game board. Continue the auction of power plants and draw replacements as necessary until all players have their chance to buy a new power plant
or pass. After finishing phase 2, remove the lowest numbered power plant and the Step 3 card from the market and do not draw replacements! Step 3 starts in phase 3.
2. If the Step 3 card is drawn in phase 4 (Building) for replacements of too small power plants, remove this card and the smallest numbered power plant from the game
and do not draw replacements. Shuffle the draw stack with the remaining power plants and place it face down next to the game board. Step 3 starts in phase 5.
3. If the Step 3 card is drawn in phase 5 (Bureaucracy), remove this card and the lowest numbered power plant from the game and do not draw replacements. Shuffle
the draw stack with the remaining power plants and place it face down next to the game board. Use the re-supply of resources for Step 2 a final time. Step 3 starts in
phase 1 of the next turn.
During step 3, there are only 6 power plants in the power plant market and all of these power plants are in the actual market and are available to be auctioned (there is no
future market in step 3).
In step 3, every city can have three houses. The building price for the third house is 20 Elektro. Please check the tables for the changed re-supply of resources.
In phase 5 in following rounds of step 3: remove the smallest numbered power plant from the game and draw a replacement from the draw stack. During the last rounds
of the game, it is possible that the draw stack becomes exhausted. The game continues and in each phase 5, the players remove the smallest numbered power plant. It is
possible to run out of power plants if this goes on for several rounds.
= coal = oil = garbage = uranium

WINNING THE GAME:
The game ends immediately after phase 4 when at least one player has at least 17 cities in his network. No player can buy more resources or power plants at this time!
The winner is the player who can supply electricity to the most cities in his network with the power plants and resources he has. If there is a tie, the player with the most
remaining money wins. If there is still a tie, the player with the most cities in his network is the winner.
Important: Sometimes (not rarely) a player other than one with 17 or more cities will win because the latter cannot supply electricity to all his cities, either because his
power plants are not large enough to run all his cities or because he does not have sufficient resources to run the power plants he has. This reinforces the need for players to
balance their power plants, resources, and networks.
Exceptions, changes, and special things
Depending on the number of players some details of the game change. A summary is shown in the following table. For example you need fewer power plants for 2 players,
but both of them can own up to 4 power plants.
Exceptions and special cases
> In the first round of the game, each player must buy a power plant.
> The players do not have to choose their starting cities in the first round. They can start their networks in later rounds to influence their positions in the playing order.
> In steps 2 and 3, a player only pays a building cost of 10 Elektro to connect to an empty city.
> A player may never connect to the same city twice.
> If there is a tie, the player with the most remaining money wins. If there is still a tie, the player with the most cities in his network is the winner.
CREDITS:
Author: Friedemann Friese
Rules text: Friedemann Friese & Henning Krpke (August 2009)
Translation and editing: Henning Krpke & Jay Tummelson
Artwork & design: Maura Kalusky
Rio Grande Games
PO Box 1033
Placitas, NM 87043, USA
RioGames@aol.com
www.riograndegames.com



GAME NAME:
Eclipse
A New Dawn for the Galaxy
RULEBOOK:
CREDITS:
Game design
Touko Tahkokallio
Development, graphic design and rule book
Sampo Siki >>> samposdesign.com
Game box cover and species illustrations
Ossi Hiekkala >>> archipictor.com
Publisher
Game rules and hexes use elements of images created
by ESA/Hubble and released with their kind permission.
eclipse typeface is based on Franchise by Derek Weathersbee.
Extra Special Thank You for your help:
Antti Autio, Petri Savola, Atte Moilanen, Stefan Engblom
Thank You for playtests and advice
Antti Mentula, Jouni Heinnen, Olli-Pekka Vaija, Eero
Puurunen, Sally Londesborough, Otto Kataja, Tiina Merikoski,
Albert Kaikkonen, Matleena Muhonen, Iina Valkeisenmki,
Teemu Salohalme, Susanna Louhesto, Johanna
Louhesto, Mikko Karvonen, Reko Nokkanen, Ilari Tahkokallio,
Anttoni Huhtala, Arto Klami, Veli-Matti Jaakkola,
Tuomas Lehto, Jani Koistiola, Juha Linnanen, Antti Koskinen,
Antti Tahvanainen, Mika Lemstrm, Jussi Kurki, Ossi
Lehtinen, Paul Laane, Aarne Ekstrm, Ilkka Salminen,
Valtteri Arvaja, Tero Srkijrvi, Atte Tamminen, Mikko
Saari, Ville Saari, Hannu Sinisalo, Sonja Tolvanen, Kalle
Malmioja, Aleksi Siirtola, Matias Viitasalo, Atro Kajaste,
Antti Muhonen, Timo Ollikainen, Kimmo Leivo, Aleksi Ahtiainen,
Oskari Westerholm, Juuso Mattila, Heikki Hyhk,
Olli Sandberg, Michael Xuereb, Chris Rudram, Deryk Sinotte,
Gregor MacDougall, Dustin Boggs, Tony Vickery,
Josh Aitken, Juuso Takalainen, Bjarne Bostrm, Antti,
Stefan Wahoff, Sren Paukstadt, Ronny Vorbrodt, Alexis
D, Paul Grogan, Filip Murmak and everyone else who
played the game in conventions and game clubs. Also a
big Thank You to everyone on the BoardGameGeek for
your interest and support!

The galaxy has been a peaceful place for many
years. After the ruthless TerranHegemony War
(30.02733.364), much effort has been employed
by all major spacefaring species to prevent the
terrifying events from repeating themselves. The
Galactic Council was formed to enforce precious
peace and it has taken many courageous efforts
to prevent the escalation of malicious acts.
Nevertheless, tension and discord are growing
among the seven major species and in the Council
itself. Old alliances are shattering and hasty
diplomatic treaties are made in secrecy. A confrontation
of the superpowers seems inevitable 
only the outcome of the galactic conflict remains
to be seen. Which faction will emerge victorious
and lead the galaxy under its rule?
The shadows of the great civilizations are about
to eclipse the galaxy. Lead your people to victory!

COMPONENTS:
- player materials In 6 player colors (blue, red, green, yellow, black, white), one color
for each player: 14 plastic spaceship miniatures
(8 Interceptors, 4 Cruisers, 2 Dreadnoughts),
- 4 Starbase Tiles
- 33 Populatio Cubes
- 16 Influence Discs
- 3 Ambassador Tiles
hexes:
- 37 Sector hexes: 8 Inner hexes (numbered
101108)
- 11 Middle hexes (#201211)
- 18 Outer hexes (#301318)
- 1 Galactic Center hex (#001)
- 6 Starting Sector hexes (#221232)
boards
- 6 Player Boards (two-sided)
- 1 Supply Board
tiles
- 96 Technology Tiles (24 different)
- 154 Ship Part Tiles (17 different)
- 21 Discovery Tiles
- 22 Colony Ship Tiles
- 21 Ancient Ship Tiles
- 1 Galactic Center Defense System Tile
- 32 Reputation Tiles
- 22 Orbital / Monolith Tiles
- 2 Crowded Hex Tiles
- 6 Summary Cards
- 1 Traitor Card
- 4 Info Cards
miscellaneous
- 18 6-sided dice (8 yellow, 6 orange, 4 red)
- 18 Storage marker octagons (6 each in orange, pink and brown),
- 12 purple Damage Cubes
- 1 Starting Player Marker
- 1 Round Marker
- 2 cloth bags (for Technology Tiles and Reputation Tiles)
The punch sheets also contain some blank
tiles (4 Ambassadors, 1 Technology, 1 Discovery, 1 Reputation and 9 round ones).
These are not needed in the game.
A game of Eclipse places you in control of a vast interstellar
civilization, competing for success with its
rivals.
On each game round you expand your civilization
by exploring and colonizing new areas, researching
technologies and building spaceships to wage war
with. The game ends after 9 rounds, and the player
with most Victory Points wins. Victory Points are
gained from controlling galactic sectors, fighting
battles, forming diplomatic relations, researching
technologies, making discoveries and controlling
Monoliths.
There are many potential
paths to victory, so you
need to plan your strategy according to the strengths
and weaknesses of your species while paying attention
to the other civilizations' endeavors!
dice storage marker damage cube round
marker
[1] Ship Part Tiles [2] Round Marker [3] Supply Board [4] Research track [5] Discovery Tiles
[6] Ancient Ship Tiles [7] Orbital and Monolith Tiles [8] Damage Cubes [9] Traitor Card
[10] Galactic Center hex [11] Galactic Center Defense System Tile [12] Sector hex stacks
[13] Player Board [14] Player starting hex [15] Ships [16] Ambassador Tiles [17] Influence Discs
[18] Population Cubes [19] Colony Ships [20] Summary Card [21] Storage Markers [22] Storage Track
[23] Technology Track [24] Reputation Track [25] Interceptor
preparations
blue players play area
SETUP:
Set the Ship Part Tiles [1] and the Round Marker [2] on the Supply
Board [3]. Put the Technology Tiles in the bag and shuffle them. Draw
random Technology Tiles (according to the number of players) from
the bag and set them on their spots [4] on the Research Tracks. Set
similar tiles on top of each other. Put the Reputation Tiles in another
bag and shuffle them. Shuffle the Discovery Tiles [5] and set them face
down on their spot on the Supply Board. Set the Ancient Ship Tiles [6],
Orbital and Monolith [7] Tiles, Damage Cubes [8] and the Traitor Card
[9] likewise on the Supply Board.
Set the Galactic Center [10] hex in the middle of the table. Place a Discovery
Tile face down on the Galactic Center hex and the Galactic Center
Defense System Tile [11] on top of it. Place the Sector hex tiles face
down in three stacks, Inner (I), Middle (II) and Outer (III) sector hexes
(according to the number of players) in separate stacks [12]. Give the
Starting Player Marker to the player who has spent the least time on
planet Terra, in the Sol system.
Beginning from the starting player and moving clockwise, each player
chooses a starting hex and the accompanying Player Board [13].
He then places his Starting Sector hex [14] in one of the six starting
spots in the Middle sector area (two hexes away from the Center hex;
the illustration on left shows a three player setup). Place your hex in
the starting spot closest to you. Put the rest of the starting hexes and
boards back in the box  they are not used in the game.
Each player takes the following and puts them next to his board:
 all Ships, Ambassador Tiles, discs and cubes [15, 16, 17, 18] of one
color
 3 Colony Ship Tiles [19]
 a Summary Card, Action Phase overview side up [20]
Each player places on his Player Board:
 one Influence Disc on each circle of the Influence Track [17]
 one Population Cube on each square of the three Population Tracks
(Money, Science and Materials) [18]; the rightmost square on each
track (marked with a lighter background) is left empty.
 one Storage marker of each color [21] on his Storage Track [22]:
Money marker at "2", Science marker at "3" and Materials at "3"
Each player then moves onto his starting hex:
 one Interceptor Ship miniature [25]
 one Population Cube on each of the Population Squares (not on the
Advanced squares, marked with a star), taken from the corresponding
Population Track [26]
 one Influence Disc on the Influence circle, taken from his Influence
Track [27]
alien species These rules apply for the Terran species and are written
from their point of view. It is recommended that you play your first
game using just them, and add the alien species in the next game. They
mostly follow the same rules, but each has some slight differences,
such as different starting Resources, number of Ships you may move
with the Move action, etc. Please refer to pages 2627 for the differences
of each species.
If you decide to play with the alien species, players choose the species
they play with. Beginning with the player on the right side of the starting
player and moving counterclockwise, each player chooses a species
and places the starting hex. Note that if you choose Terrans, you
also effectively choose one alien species out of the game.
tech Tiles
2 players: 12
3 players: 14
4 players: 16
5 players: 18
6 players: 20
outer sectors
2 players: 5
3 players: 10
4 players: 14
5 players: 16
6 players: 18
preparations
6 players
4 players
starting layouTS
5 players
3 players
2 players
extra discs?
Note that you have three extra
discs that are only used if you
Research the Advanced Robotics
or Quantum Grid Technologies.
GAME CONCEPTS:
population Cubes Your civilization's
population is represented by the
small wooden Population Cubes in
your player color. When your civilization
expands to a new sector, it may
be colonized by moving the Population
Cubes on your Player Board to
the squares on the sector hex. The
more cubes you move to the hexes, the more Resources
( Money, Science, Materials) you produce. The leftmost
visible square on each Population Track shows how
many units you will produce in each round (in the picture
above, 12 Money, 21 Science, 15 Materials).
resources Your hexes produce three kinds of Resources:
Money, Science and Materials.
Money is needed for using Influence: controlling
hexes and taking actions requires that you pay
Money at the end of the round.
Science is needed for Research: researching new
Technologies requires that you pay Science.
Materials are needed for Building: building new
Ships and Structures requires that you pay Materials.
The amount of each Resource you have is marked
with a Storage Marker on the Storage Track. The Storage
size is unlimited.
influence discs Your civilization's
influence is represented
by the wooden Influence
Discs in your player
color. Influence Discs are
used to mark the hexes your
civilization controls. Also,
taking an action requires you to move an Influence Disc on
the corresponding action space. The leftmost visible circle
on the Influence Track shows how much Money you have
to pay at the end of the round to keep your civilization functioning
(in the picture above, 2 Money). Thus, the more
hexes you control and more actions you take, the more
Money you need to pay.
component limitations There is a limited amount of Ships,
Population Cubes, Influence Discs, Technology Tiles, Discovery
Tiles, Reputation Tiles and Ambassador Tiles. If they
run out, they run out. Ship Part Tiles, Orbital / Monolith
Tiles and Damage Cubes are unlimited, so in the unlikely
case they run out, use a substitute.
Technology Researching Technologies gives
your civilization advantages. Some Technologies
are required for upgrading certain
parts of your Ships or building new Ships
and Structures, while others make your civilization
more efficient (e.g. increasing your
production or giving you more Influence Discs). The Technologies
are divided in three categories: Military, Grid and
Nano Technologies. Researching a Technology in a category
gives you discount in further research of that category. Researched
Technologies are placed on your Player Board.
Ships: Ships are used for fighting
against other players and the
non-player Ancients, as well as occasional
exploring. There are four
kinds of Ships:
 Interceptors; 8 available
for each player
 Cruisers; 4 available
 Dreadnoughts; 2 available
 Starbases; 4 available
Bigger Ships cost more to build but have more space for
Ship Parts. Starbases are immobile.
ship parts Each kind of Ship has its
own blueprint on your Player Board.
Players can customize their Ships
during the game: the Ship Parts (preprinted
or gained with the Upgrade
action) on the blueprint give the Ship
its abilities. There are several different
types of parts:
 Cannons are used on each combat
round to attack enemy Ships.
Different Cannons make different
amounts of damage: each star is
one point of damage.
 Missiles are like Cannons, but used
only in the beginning of the combat.
 Hull absorbs damage. Hulls ability
to absorb damage is marked with
stars: each Hull symbol absorbs
one point of damage.
 Computers make weapons hit
more easily, and also give more Initiative.
 Shields make your Ship more difficult
to hit.
 Drives make Ships move further
with one move, and also give the
Ships more Initiative.
 Energy Sources produce Energy for
other Ship Parts.
Some Ship blueprints have extra
Ship Parts outside the Ship Part grid.
These work just like the other Ship
Parts, except that they cannot be replaced.

initiative
bonus
requires a
technology
energy
consumption
game concepts
Structures: Structures are colossal
objects built on your controlled
hexes. Orbitals provide
your population a place to live
in: each Orbital can hold a single
Population Cube. Monoliths give you points at the end of
the game. Structures are permanent objects which stay on
the hex until the end of the game.
discovery Tiles Some hexes contain a Discovery Tile which
is awarded to you when you first take control of the hex
by placing an Influence Disc there. Each Discovery tile is
double sided: the face side has a benefit (extra Resources,
new Technologies, Ancient Ship Parts..) and the back side
has a 2 Victory Point value. When receiving a tile, you must
immediately decide which side you use. The Discovery Tile
benefits are:
3x +8 Money, 3x +5 Science,
3x +6 Materials: move your
Storage marker and discard
the tile.
3x Ancient Technology: you
may take the cheapest Technology
Tile you don't already
have from the Supply Board
and place it on your Player
Board for free. Discard the
Discovery Tile.
3x Ancient Cruiser: place one
of your unused Cruisers in
the hex and discard the tile.
6x Ancient Ship Part: you
may place this part in any of
your Ships (returning an existing
part if needed); you may also keep the part next to your
board and place it later with the Upgrade action; if you later
want to replace an Ancient Ship Part, it is discarded.
Discovery Tiles kept as Victory Points are placed next to
your Player Board back side up until the end of the game.
reputation Tiles You receive Reputation Tiles
from combat. They are worth Victory Points at the
end of the game.
ambassador Tiles You can use your Ambassadors
to form Diplomatic relations with other
players. They increase your production and are
worth Victory Points at the end of the game.
Trade At any time, you may convert 2 units of
one Resource (Money, Science or Materials) to
1 unit of any other.
crowded hex tile In the occasion you cannot fit
all Ship miniatures in a hex, you may place them
somewhere else on the table and mark the hex
with a Crowded Hex Tile.
wormholes Due to the galactic distances, star ships in
Eclipse may move only using the wormhole network. Also,
exploring the galaxy is possible only through a wormhole.
hexes The game board is built from hexagonal tiles ("hexes")
during the game. Each hex represents a sector of star
systems and may contain a number of colored Population
Squares which represent star clusters with worlds producing
Resources.
Each sector (Inner, Middle and Outer) has its own hex stack.
In the beginning of the game, only the Center hex and
players' start sectors are placed on the table. The rest are
placed during the game. The Inner and Middle sectors are
laid out in concentric circles around the Center hex. Outer
sectors may branch freely outwards.
Inner sectors are numbered 101108, Middle sectors 201
211, Outer sectors 301318, Starting sectors 221232 and
the Galactic Center is 001.
[1] Influence circle [2] Victory Point value [3] Wormhole
[4] Artifact [5] Population Square / Money [6] Population
Square / Advanced Money [7] Population Square / Science
[8] Population Square / Advanced Science [9] Population
Square / Materials [10] Hex number
ORBITAL MONOLITH
i Inner sectors
center
ii middle sectors
ii start sectors iii outer sectors
Tile back
game concepts
action phase
Starting from the player with the Starting Player Marker
and moving clockwise, each player may take one action or
pass. This continues around until all players have passed.
The first player to pass gets the Starting Player Marker for
the next round. When taking an action, move the rightmost
Influence Disc from your Influence Track to your Action
Track. You may choose an Action you have already taken.
The more actions you take, the more Upkeep you have to
pay at the end of the round, so remember to pass in time!
The possible actions are:
explore
influence
research
upgrade
build
move
reaction (upgrade, build or move)
Players who have passed may not take any other actions
than Reactions, which are weaker versions of Build, Upgrade
and Move actions (see Reactions on page 14). When
passing, flip your Summary Card so that the dark, game
round overview side is face up. This will help other players
to see who have already passed.
end of action phase After every player's Summary Card has
been flipped dark side up, the Action phase ends immediately.
No more Reactions may be taken.
game round
The game round consists of these four phases:
action phase Players take actions clockwise,
one action at a time
combat phase Battles are resolved and
sectors conquered
upkeep phase Civilization Upkeep costs are paid and
Resources produced
cleanup phase Players move Influence Discs from the
action spaces back to their Influence Track
and new Technology Tiles are drawn
example! There is an example of a
full Action Phase on pages 1617.
colony Ships At any time during your action,
you may activate one or more of your face
up Colony Ships. For each activated Colony Ship, you may
place one Population Cube to an empty Population Square
in any hex where you have an Influence Disc. Each Population
Cube you place must come from the Population Track
that corresponds to the color of the Population Square on
the hex. Activated Colony Ships are flipped face down. Using
Colony Ships is the only way to move Population Cubes
to the hexes and increase your production! In the example
on the right, Blue activates two Colony Ships and flips them
face down. He moves two Population Cubes to the hex.
gray squares The gray planets represent
worlds that are suitable for
any production. The gray Population
Squares may receive a Population
Cube from any of the three Population Tracks. If you
remove a cube from a gray Population Square, you
may place it to any Population Track (ie. you don't
have to remember which track it came from).
advanced squares Planets with a star
symbol represent harsher worlds that
are difficult to colonize. You may only
place cubes in the squares marked with
a star if you have researched the related
Advanced Technology.
orbitals Orbitals are artificial living environments
that players may build. An Orbital
may only receive a Population Cube
from the Money or Science track.
action phase
Explore:
Choose one of the unexplored spaces next to a hex where
you have a Ship or an Influence Disc and turn a hex tile
from the corresponding stack (I, II or III) in it. If you Explore
from a hex with only a Ship, it must not be "pinned" (see
Move on page 14).
Show the hex tile and choose to either place or discard it.
If you discard the tile, your turn ends immediately. Discards
are placed face up. If you decide to place the tile, the following
restrictions apply:
 the hex can be placed only to the spot that you explored
 the hex must be oriented so that at least one of the
Wormholes on the hex connects with a Wormhole on
one of the hexes where you have a disc or a Ship
In the diagram on the left, hexes marked with A and B
would be legal placements.
Hexes in Inner and Middle sectors are laid in circles around
the central hex; hexes in Outer sectors may branch outwards
(see layout example on page 7).
If the hex contains a Discovery symbol, put a Discovery Tile
on it face down.
If the hex contains Ancient symbols, put that many Ancient
Ship tiles on it, on top of the Discovery Tile.
After placing the hex, you may take control of the hex by
placing an Influence Disc from your Influence Track on the
hex. If the hex contains a Discovery Tile, you may take it
when placing the Influence Disc. All Discovery Tiles are double
sided: the tile back has a 2 VP value, and the face side
has a bonus (see page 7). Show the face side of the Discovery,
and immediately decide which side to use. Tiles that
are used as Victory Points are placed next to your Player
Board with the side showing the Victory Point value face
up.
Important! Ancient Ships must be destroyed (see Combat
Phase, page 18) before the Influence Disc may be placed
and the Discovery Tile taken. If there are Ships of several
players competing for the same hex, the player who eventually
gets to place the disc receives the tile.
The Center hex contains the Galactic Center Defense System,
which must be destroyed (see Combat Phase, page
18) before an Influence Disc may be placed.
After placing the Influence Disc, you may activate your
Colony Ships to place Population Cubes on the Population
Squares on the hex.
If the hexes in a stack run out, shuffle the discarded hexes
of that stack as a new stack. If there are no more hexes, the
Explore action has no use.
important! Remember that
you may use your
Colony Ships at
any time during
your turn.
Wormhole Generator
If you have the Wormhole Generator
Technology, you may place the hex
so that there is only a half Wormhole
connecting the placed hex and
the hex you Explored from. In the
diagram above, when using the Wormhole Generator,
placements A, B, C and D would be legal, but E would
not.
ancient symbol
ancient Ship
discovery symbol
discovery
tile back
action phase
explore action lets your
civilization explore the
uncharted regions of the galaxy.
influence
By selecting the Influence action, you may move up to two
Influence Discs. These moves may be:
 from your Influence Track, or
 from a hex where you have an Influence Disc
 to a hex that does not contain an Influence Disc or an enemy
Ship and is adjacent to a hex where you have a disc
or a Ship, or
 to a hex where only you have a Ship, or
 back to your Influence Track.
The hex Influenced has to have a Wormhole connection to
the hex where you have a disc or a Ship. In the example on
the right, you could Influence hexes A, B and G.
After placing an Influence Disc, you may activate your
Colony Ships to place Population Cubes on the Population
Squares on the hex.
During the Influence action, you may turn two of your used
Colony Ships face up, even if you choose to move no Influence
Discs.
removing a disc from a hex If you remove an Influence
Disc from a hex, you must also return all cubes from the
hex to their respective Population Tracks on your board. If a
cube is returned from a gray (wild) square, you may choose
which Track it goes to. Similarly, if a cube is returned from
an Orbital, you may return it to either the Money or Science
Track.
important! Remember that
you may use your
Colony Ships at
any time during
your turn.
Wormhole Generator
If you have the Wormhole Generator
Technology, you may Influence
through a hex edge that has a
Wormhole on just one side.
In the example below, Blue could
Influence hexes A, B, C, D and G,
but not E or F.
action phase
influence action lets your
civilization conquer vacant
hexes or withdraw from hexes.
Diplomacy:
Players can form Diplomatic relations when their hexes
connect. Diplomacy rules are not used in the two and three
player games.
diplomatic relations If one of the hexes where you have
an Influence Disc gets connected through a Wormhole to
a hex where another player has a Disc, you and the other
player may agree on forming Diplomatic relations with each
other. Diplomatic relations can be formed at any time on any
of your turns. The connection may happen either by Explore
or Influence actions, or at the end of the Combat Phase (see
page 21). There must be a full Wormhole connection, so you
cannot use the Wormhole Generator Technology to connect
through a half Wormhole. You
may not form Diplomatic relations if
your Ship is in a hex with an opposing
player's Ship or Influence Disc, or
vice versa.
If you both agree, give the other
player one of your Ambassador
Tiles and place one of your Population
Cubes on top of it. The cube may
come from any of the three Population tracks.
The Tile is placed on one of the free spaces
on the other players Reputation Track. The
other player also gives you an Ambassador
Tile and a Population Cube. Place them on
an empty space on your Reputation Track.
Ambassador Tiles on your Reputation Track
are worth 1 Victory Point at the end of the
game. Note that your Reputation Track also
holds your Reputation Tiles (see Combat on
page 18). If the board is full when taking an
Ambassador Tile, you may discard Reputation
Tiles, returning them to the Reputation
Tile bag.
You may not have more than one Ambassador Tile from
each player. You may rearrange the tiles on your Reputation
Track at any time, but you may not discard Ambassador
Tiles. Note that the Terrans have one space on the track
that may only hold an Ambassador Tile.
breaking diplomatic relations Your Diplomatic relations
stay in effect until the end of the game, unless you attack
one of the players you have Diplomatic relations with, or
they attack you. Moving your Ships to a hex where the other
player has a disc or a Ship is also considered an attack.
Both players then return the Ambassador Tiles and cubes
to the owner. The cube goes back to a Population Track,
chosen freely by the owner.
Whenever you attack a player and thus break the Diplomatic
relations, you receive the Traitor Card from its previous
holder. The player holding the Traitor Card may not form
new Diplomatic relations as long as he has the card. Whoever
holds the Traitor Card at the end of the game receives
a 2 VP penalty.
diplomatic relations example
In the example below, Green and Red may form Diplomatic
relations with each other. Blue and Red may
not, since Red's Interceptor is in a hex with Blue's
Influence Disc. Blue and Green
may not form Diplomatic relations
either, since their
Interceptors are in the
same hex.
May hold either an Ambassador
or a Reputation Tile
May hold only an Ambassador Tile
May hold only a Reputation Tile
action phase
ambassador Tile
diplomatic relations
increase your production
and grant Victory Points.
Research:
By taking the Research action,
you may choose one
available Technology Tile
from the Supply Board, pay
its Science cost (move
the Storage Marker backwards
on the Storage Track)
and put the tile on your
Player Board on the track of
its category (Military, Grid
or Nano). For each Technology
of that category you
already have, you get a discount shown on the leftmost exposed
space on the Technology Track.
However, note that for each Technology there is a minimum
cost you have to pay regardless of the discount you have.
There are three special types of Technologies:
Ship Part: gives the ability to Upgrade this Ship Part.
Build: gives the ability to Build this Ship or Structure.
Instant: gives a one-time effect when it is Researched.
Example: You already have Monolith
and Orbital Technologies and you research
Fusion Drive. Your Nano Technology
discount is 2, but you still have to
pay 3 Science, since it is the minimum cost
for Fusion Drive.
Military Technologies:
Neutron Bombs: If you have the Neutron Bombs
Technology, you may destroy all the Population
Cubes from the hex after the combat without rolling
any dice (see Combat Phase on page 18).
Starbase: You may Build Starbases.
Plasma Cannon: You may Upgrade plasma Cannon Ship
Parts.
Phase Shield: You may Upgrade phase shield Ship
Parts.
Advanced Mining: You may place Population
Cubes in the Advanced Materials squares
with your Colony Ships.
Tachyon Source: You may Upgrade Tachyon Source Ship
Parts.
Plasma Missile: You may Upgrade plasma Missile Ship
Parts.
Gluon Computer: You may Upgrade gluon computer
Ship Parts.
grid Technologies
Gauss Shield: You may Upgrade gauss shield Ship Parts.
Improved Hull: You may Upgrade Improved Hull Ship
Parts.
Fusion Source: You may Upgrade Fusion Source Ship
Parts.
Positron Computer: You may Upgrade positron
computer Ship Parts.
Advanced Economy: You may place
Population Cubes in the Advanced Money
squares with your Colony Ships.
Tachyon Drive: You may Upgrade tachyon drive Ship
Parts.
Antimatter Cannon: You may Upgrade Antimatter
Cannon Ship Parts.
Quantum Grid: You receive two additional Influence
Discs, placed immediately in the leftmost empty
circles on your Influence Track.
Nano Technologies
Nanorobots: You may Build one additional Ship or
Structure (excluding Reaction Builds).
Fusion Drive: You may Upgrade fusion drive Ship Parts.
Advanced Robotics: You receive one additional
Influence Disc, placed immediately in the leftmost
empty circle on your Influence Track.
Orbital: You may Build Orbitals.
Advanced Labs: You may place Population
Cubes in the Advanced Science squares with
your Colony Ships.
Monolith: You may Build Monoliths.
Artifact Key: You must immediately take 5 Resources
for each Artifact on your hexes. The Resources can be
either Money, Science or Materials, in groups of five.
Wormhole Generator: You may Explore, Influence
and Move through a hex edge that has a Wormhole
on just one side.
You may not choose a Technology that you already have.
The Technologies are kept on your Technology Tracks until
the end of the game. They may not be discarded.
starting technologies Terrans and some alien species
have starting Technologies preprinted on their Technology
Tracks. These are regarded in every way just like the Technology
Tiles acquired through the Research action. They
may not be covered with other Technology Tiles.
cost type
category
Technology name
MINIMUM cost
action phase
research action lets your
civilization develop new
Technologies.
Upgrade:
When choosing the Upgrade action, you may modify your
Ships blueprints by placing new Ship Parts there. Each of
your Ships functions according to its blueprint described on
your Player Board. If you upgrade the Ship's blueprint with
new Ship Parts, all the Ships already built are considered to
be instantly upgraded.
With the Upgrade action, return as many Ship Part Tiles
to the Supply Board as you want. Then take up to two
tiles from the Supply Board and place them on any of the
squares on your Ship blueprints. When placing the tiles,
you may place the tiles on top of any of the printed starting
Ship Parts on your Ship blueprints, but not on top of other
Ship Part tiles.
The following restrictions apply:
 most Ship Parts (marked with the Technology symbol) require
that you have researched the corresponding Technology
(see Research on page 12) before they can be taken;
 the total Energy Consumption of the Ships parts may not
be higher than its total Energy Production; and
 Interceptors, Cruisers and Dreadnoughts must have a
Drive, Starbases are not allowed to have a Drive.
Taking and returning Ship Parts costs nothing.
All values from the Ship Parts are cumulative. For example,
if the Ship has two Fusion Drives, they will give it Movement
Value 4, Initiative 4 and Energy Consumption 4.
build
Build up to two Ships (Interceptors, Cruisers, Dreadnoughts
and Starbases) or Structures (Orbitals and Monoliths). Pay
their Material cost (move the Storage Marker backwards
on the Storage Track) and place them in any of the
hexes where you have an Influence Disc.
The following restrictions apply:
 the amount of Ships is limited to the miniatures and tiles
you have, ie. 8 Interceptors, 4 Cruisers, 2 Dreadnoughts
and 4 Starbases
 each hex may only have one Monolith and Orbital
 building Starbases, Orbitals and Monoliths require that
you have the corresponding Technology (see Research on
page 12)
building costs
Interceptor 3
Cruiser 5
Dreadnought 8
Starbase 3
Orbital 5
Monolith 10
requires
a tech
name
symbol
initiative
bonus
energy
consumption
action phase
upgrade action lets
your civilization modify
their Ships.
build action lets your
civilization build new
Ships and Structures.
cannons + Missiles: For each
colored square in your Ship,
roll the corresponding colored
die. The damage a hit
inflicts is represented by the
star symbols: each star is
one point of damage.
Computers: Make hitting easier
by adding bonuses to your
die rolls: your combined
Computer value is added to
your die rolls to hit.
Shields: targets combined
Shield value is subtracted
from your die roll to hit.
Hull: each Hull symbol
absorbs one point of damage
received.
drives: each hex pictured
increases the Ships Movement
Value by one.
energy sources: provide energy
for other Ship Parts.
structures ships
Move
The Move action allows you to move your Ships. By choosing
the Move action, you may do up to three Ship movements.
You may use the movements to move the same
Ship consecutively. With each move, the Ship may move
as many hexes as its Movement Value allows. Movement
Value depends on its Drives (each hex pictured increases
the Ships Movement Value by one; in the case of multiple
Drives, the Drive values are cumulative; see Upgrade
on page 13). Starbases are not allowed to have Drives and
therefore cannot move.
Note the restriction on Movement! The Ships may only
move through a hex edge that has a Wormhole on both
sides. In the example on the right, movement A would be
legal.
You may only move to Explored hexes, not to empty space.
If your Ships move into a hex, or out from a hex, containing
other players or Ancient Ships, at least one Ship per each
opposing Ship must stay (the Ship is said to be "pinned")
and engage in combat in the Combat Phase (see pages
1821). The Ships exceeding the number of opponents may
move. If you later on move or build more Ships to the hex,
you may change which Ships are pinned. The original Ships
may move, as long as one Ship per each opposing Ship stays
pinned.
The Galactic Center Defense System ("GCDS") engages all
the Ships in the central hex. The hex cannot be moved
through before the GCDS is destroyed.
reaction:
After passing, you may only take a Reaction action when it
is your turn in the player order. A Reaction is essentially a
weakened version of a Move, Build or Upgrade action.
Reaction can be either:
upgrade: you are allowed to return as many Ship Part
Tiles to the Supply Board as you want, and then take
one Ship Part.
build: you are allowed to build one Ship or Structure.
move: you are allowed to move only one Ship once.
A Reaction is taken by placing an Influence Disc on the Reaction
Track on your Summary Card.
The Nanorobots Technology (see Research on page 12) does
not give you an extra build when taking a Reaction.
Wormhole Generator If you have
the Wormhole Generator Technology,
you may move your Ships through
a hex edge that has a Wormhole on
just one side. In the example below,
movements A, B and C would
be legal.
movement example
Reds Interceptor has a Movement Value of 2 hexes
(two Nuclear Drives combined) and Cruiser has a
Movement Value of 3. Red has a total of three moves.
He moves the Interceptor two times and the Cruiser
one time.
Greens Interceptors also have a Movement Value
of 2, and Green has three moves. When moving, his
first Interceptor is pinned by the Red Interceptor.
The second one may move through the hex. Finally,
Green decides not to use his third move.
red
green
action phase

example of a four player game in progress:
action phase example:
Alastair (Terran), Ken (Planta), Iain (Mechanema) and Vernor
(Progress) have already played a few rounds, taking
control of sectors and developing their civilizations. Alastair
is the starting player for this Action Phase.
Alastair decides to BUILD. He moves the rightmost disc
from his Influence Track to the Build space on his Action
Track [1]. Alastair then builds one Cruiser and one Orbital.
The cost is 10 Materials, so he moves the Materials marker
10 spaces backwards on his Storage Track. Alastair was allowed
to build the Orbital since he has researched the Orbital
Technology. He places the Cruiser and the Orbital on
his hexes [2]. Alastairs turn is over, and it is Kens turn, as
he sits clockwise next to Alastair.
Ken explores and moves a disc to the corresponding action
space. He chooses an empty space he wishes to explore
and then turns the top hex tile from the corresponding
stack -- in this case, Middle Sectors (II). He decides whether
to place the hex or discard it, and chooses to place [3]. He
places the hex so that there is at least one full Wormhole
connecting the new hex and one of his hexes. There is a
Discovery symbol on the hex, so he also places a random
Discovery Tile face down on it. Ken chooses to immediately
place an Influence Disc on the hex, moving the rightmost
disc from his Influence Track to the hex [4]. Placing the disc
allows him to collect the Discovery Tile. He looks at the tile
and decides to keep it as Victory Points, so he places the
tile VP side up next to his boards. Ken also decides to colonize
the Money and Science squares on the newly placed
hex. He flips two Colony Ships face down and moves one
cube from both Money and Science Population Tracks to
the Population Squares on the hex [4]. Planta has a special
ability which allows the player to explore two hexes with
one action. Ken thus Explores another empty area [5], this
time in Outer Sectors (III). The hex he turns from the stack
isnt to his liking, so he discards it, placing it face up next to
the pile. When the Outer Sectors stack runs out, its discards
will be shuffled into a new Outer Sectors stack.
Its now Iains turn, and he decides to upgrade his Ships,
moving a disc to the Upgrade action space. Mechanemas
special ability allows him to take three Ship Part Tiles instead
of the regular two. He first returns a Electron Computer
tile from the Interceptor blueprint on his Player
Board [6] and then takes an Plasma Missile tile, a Positron
Computer tile and an Ion Cannon tile. He places the Plasma
Missile on his Interceptor [7] and the Positron Computer
and Ion Cannon tiles on his Cruiser [8]. Iain is allowed to
take Plasma Missile and Positron Computer tiles, since he
has researched the related Technologies [9].
Vernor researches: he moves a disc to the Research action
space and chooses Fusion Drive from the Supply Board. He
already has four Nano Technologies, which would grant him
a discount of 4, but the minimum price for Fusion Drive is 3.
He pays the Science cost, moving the marker 3 spaces backwards,
and places the Fusion Drive Technology Tile on his
Player Board [10]. Progresss special ability allows them to
Research two Technologies with one action. Vernor decides
to also research the Wormhole Generator. The discount is
now 6, so the Science cost is 10. He pays the the cost and
places the Technology Tile on his Player Board [11].
This example uses some alien species. Their special
abilities are presented in more detail on pages 2627.
It is Alastairs turn again. He explores in Outer Sectors and
turns a hex with two Ancient symbols. After placing the
hex, he places a random Discovery Tile face down on the
hex and two Ancient Ship Tiles on top of it [12]. An influence
disc may not be placed in the hex before the Ancient
Ships are destroyed.
Ken explores again. This time he goes for the Outer Sectors
and decides to place the two hexes on the board [13]. He
flips his remaining two Colony Ships face down and places
a cube from the Money track and a cube from the Materials
track on the first hex. He is allowed to place a cube on the
the Advanced Mining square [14], since he has researched
the Advanced Mining Technology [15]. The remaining
Population Squares on the hexes remain empty, since he
has no more Colony Ships available. Ken now also has a direct
Wormhole connection from one of his hexes to one of
Alastairs hexes [16]. He is thus able to propose Diplomatic
Relations to Alastair. Alastair agrees, so they both give each
other one of their Ambassador Tiles, along with one freely
chosen Population Cube. The tiles are placed on their Diplomacy
Tracks. Alastairs track is already full of Reputation
Tiles, so he removes one of them [17] and puts it back to
the bag.
Iain passes, turning his Summary Card over, showing the
darker game overview side up [18]. Since he is the first player
to pass on this round, he gets the starting player marker
and will be the first to act in the Action Phase on the next
round.
Vernor chooses move and sets out to attack his neighbor
Iain. He moves his two Interceptors to one of Iain's hexes
and containing three Interceptors [19]. Vernors Ships are
allowed to move through a half Wormhole, since he has the
Wormhole Generator Technology. Vernor and Iain had earlier
established Diplomatic Relations, now broken by Vernors
attack. Both return the Ambassador Tile to the owner.
The cube on the tile is placed on any of the owners Population
tracks. Vernor also takes the Traitor Card. No-one may
establish Diplomatic Relations with him as long as he holds
it. Also, if he retains the card until the end of the game, he
will be given a 2 Victory Point penalty.
It is Alastair's turn. He passes and flips his Summary Card
over.
Ken chooses influence. He is allowed to move two Influence
Discs, and he decides to take back the discs from the
two "empty" hexes (the hexes without Population Squares
have little use besides their VP value). One disc [20] goes
to the uncontrolled hex with two Population Squares and
the other [21] back to his Influence Track. After this, he flips
two Colony Ships face up. He immediately uses the Ships
again, flipping them face down and placing two Population
Cubes to his hexes [22].
Iain, having passed, may only do a reaction. He decides
that the three Interceptors in the hex are not enough
against Vernors attack, so he chooses move (placing the Influence
Disc on the Action track on his Summary Card [23])
and moves one Cruiser to the contested hex [24]. Reaction
only allows one Move, so his turn is now over.
Vernor chooses move and moves one more Interceptor and
one Cruiser to the contested hex [25]. The Cruiser moves
two hexes, allowed by its Fusion Drives.
Alastair doesnt feel the need to React and passes. Ken also
passes, and so do Iain and Vernor. As all players' Summary
Cards are now dark side up, the Action Phase ends immediately
and Combat Phase begins. There is one battle to be
resolved, between Iain and Vernor. (See combat example
on pages 2223.)
action phase:
COMBAT PHASE:
In the Combat Phase, battles are resolved. A battle will take
place if a hex is occupied by more than one party (a party
being either a player, the Ancients or the GCDS). If there is
a battle in more than one hex, the battles are resolved in
descending numerical order of the hexes (printed on one
corner of each hex). The Center hex has the lowest number
and will thus always be resolved last.
If a hex contains more than two parties, battles are first
resolved among the players' Ships with the sole surviving
player then engaging the Ancients or the GCDS in battle.
If the hex contains more than two players' Ships, battles between
players are resolved two players at a time, in reverse
order of entry into the hex.
Therefore, the two players who last entered the hex will
battle each other first and the surviving player will then
battle the player who entered before the two. The survivor
of that battle will fight the next player in reverse order of
entry and so forth. The last surviving player will battle the
Ancients, if any.
In the example on the right, the Red player is already in
the hex. Green moves there first, and then Blue. Green and
Blue will battle first, and Red will then battle the survivor.
If the hex already has an Influence Disc and is thus controlled
by a player, that player is always considered the defender
and will fight last regardless of the entry order, even
if his Ships actually moved there last.
main concept Each Ship type (Interceptor, Cruiser...) of
each player are activated in Initiative order. The Ship type
with the highest Initiative goes first. All Initiative ties are
resolved in the defenders favor. The defender is always
the player who has an Influence Disc on the hex. In the case
of a hex with no disc, or a hex with more than two players,
the defender is the player who moved there first.
In the example on the right, the Red Interceptor's Initiative
is 6: 2 for the Ship's default Initiative, +2 for the Computer
and +2 for the Drive. The Blue Dreadnought's Initiative is
3: 0 for the Ship's default Initiative +1 +1 +1 for the three
Drives.
You simultaneously roll dice for all your Ships of one type.
Which dice are rolled is determined by the number of Ships
and by the weapons they carry: for each die symbol in your
Ships blueprint, you are allowed to roll one die of the corresponding
color. The dice of different colors allow you to
roll for all the weapons in your Ships of the same type simultaneously.
After rolling, you choose which enemy Ship
you assign each die to (see combat example on pages 22
23). Several dice may be assigned to the same target.
In the example on the right (using the ship blueprints
above), the Red player would roll three yellow dice, one for
the Ion Cannon on each of his Interceptors. Blue would roll
two yellow dice and two orange dice.
red blue
combat phase

-6 hit
hitting Rolling a 6 is always a hit and rolling an 1 is always
a miss, regardless of any bonuses the Ships may have. For
other die results, add the value of your Computers to the
die roll and subtract the value of the targets Shields. If you
end up with a value equal or greater to 6, the die is a hit.
damage Different weapons do a different amount of damage
when they hit. Ion Cannon (yellow die) inflicts 1 damage,
Plasma Cannon and Plasma Missile (orange die) 2
damage and Antimatter Cannon (red die) 4 damage. The
amount of damage a weapon inflicts is presented by star
symbols on the weapon tile.
By default, one point of damage will destroy a Ship. Each
Hull symbol on Ship Parts will absorb one point of damage.
So, if a Ship has two Improved Hull parts, it will be
destroyed by the fifth point of damage. Damage from one
die (eg. Plasma or Antimatter Cannons) may not be split to
several targets.
If a Ship sustains damage but is not destroyed, mark the
damage by placing Damage Cubes next to the Ship.
ancient Ships Each Ancient Ship has:
2 x Ion Cannon
Electron Computer
Hull
Initiative 2
galactic center defense system The GCDS has:
4 x Ion Cannon
Electron Computer
7 x Hull
Initiative 0
fighting the ancients and the gcds One of the other players
rolls the dice for the Ancients and the GCDS. If possible,
the dice are assigned so that your Ship(s) are destroyed, the
largest possible first. If no Ships can be destroyed, the dice
should be assigned to inflict as much damage to your Ships
as possible, the largest possible first.
In the example on the left, the Ancients rolled 5 and 6,
which means two hits. The Interceptor is the only one that
can be destroyed, so one of the dice is assigned to it. The
other one is assigned to the largest possible one, in this
case the Dreadnought.
combat phase
+3 -1
20
COURSE OF BATTLE:
Every battle begins with Ships firing their Missiles (if any)
once and continues with repeated Engagement rounds until
only one of the sides remains in the hex.
missiles All Ship types of each player equipped
with Missiles fire their Missiles in Initiative order.
You roll two orange dice for each Plasma
Missile Ship Part.
Engagement round Each Ship type of each player is activated
in Initiative order. Each of your Ship types may on its
turn decide to either attack or retreat.
The Engagement round is repeated until one of the sides
has been completely removed from the hex. Then the players
return the destroyed Ships to their owners.
retreat When you decide to retreat your Ships, move
them to the edge of a neighboring hex to show that they
are retreating. The hex to which you retreat must contain
your Influence Disc and must not contain enemy Ships.
The normal Wormhole movement rules must be followed
(see the example on the right). If you have the Wormhole
Generator Technology, you may retreat through a hex edge
that has a Wormhole on just one side.
While the ships are on the edge of the hex, they are retreating
and can still be shot at. The next time it is the retreating
Ships' turn, all of them must move to the neighboring hex.
They have now fully retreated and can no longer be shot at.
stalemate If a battle ends in a situation where it's not possible
for either player to destroy the other (this may only happen
when none of the Ships in a battle are armed with a cannon),
the attacker may retreat (following the requirements
for the hex he is retreating to). If not, his Ships are destroyed.
attacking population After all battles have
been resolved, the remaining Ships may attack
the population in the hex. Each Ship may
attack once with all of its Cannons (Missiles
may not be used), using the normal rules to
hit. Population is considered not to have any shields. Each
point of damage destroys one Population Cube of your
choosing. If you have the Neutron Bombs Technology, you
may destroy all the Population Cubes from the hex without
rolling any dice.
Destroyed cubes are returned to the defeated
players Graveyards of the corresponding
color. The cubes are returned to
their respective Population Tracks in Cleanup Phase (see
page 24). If a cube is destroyed from a gray (wild) square,
the owner may choose which Graveyard it goes to. Similarly,
if a cube is returned from an Orbital, you may return
it to either the Money or Science Track. Destroying Population
Cubes does not grant Reputation Tiles (see next page).
orbitals and monoliths Orbitals and Monoliths may not
be attacked, nor are they ever removed from the hex. The
population on the Orbital must be destroyed the same way
as the other Population Cubes.
retreat example The Green Interceptor decides to
retreat from hex A. It may retreat to hex B (only his
own disc) but not to C (only his own Ship), D (empty)
or E (contains an enemy Ship). Red cannot retreat
anywhere.
attacking population example The Red Interceptors
attack Blue's population once with their Ion
Cannons, rolling three yellow dice. Two dice hit (6 is
always a hit, and 3+3=6), but the third one misses.
Red removes two of Blue's cubes, but since at least
one of the cubes stays on the hex, so does the Influence
Disc.
combat phase
red
reputation Tiles After all battles in a hex have been resolved,
each involved player draws Reputation Tiles from
the bag as follows:
 1 tile for taking part in one or more battles
 1 tile for each opposing Interceptor, Starbase
and Ancient Ship destroyed
 2 tiles for each opposing Cruiser destroyed
 3 tiles for each opposing Dreadnought
destroyed
 3 tiles for the Galactic Center Defense
System destroyed
You may not draw more than five tiles. Choose
one of the tiles and place it face down on your
Reputation Track. Put the rest of the tiles back
in the bag. If the track is full, you may return
any of your Reputation Tiles (including the one
you just drew or one from the track) in the
bag. The tiles are drawn in the order the players
entered the hex, so that the player who
first entered the hex will draw all his tiles first.
retreat penalty If all of your remaining Ships retreat from
the hex, you get no Reputation Tiles for taking part in the
battle, but you still get tiles from destroyed enemy Ships.
influencing hexes At the end of the Combat Phase, if you
have at least one Ship in a hex that has no population, remove
the previous controllers Influence Disc (returning
it to his Influence Track). After this, you may place your
own Influence Disc there. Also, if at the end of the Combat
Phase your Ship is in a hex without an Influence Disc, you
may place a disc there.
repair damage At the end of the Combat Phase, all the
Damage Cubes are removed from the Ships.
player elimination In the unlikely event that you lose all
of your Influence Discs and Ships from the game board, you
may no longer place Influence Discs on hexes. You may continue
to produce Resources each round (note that you will
have some production even if you do not have any Population
Cubes on the board) and take Research actions, which
may still grant a few Victory Points. It is very unlikely that
your score will be high, as just the hexes will often grant
you over 10 Victory Points. You may also give up the game,
counting your score and returning all your game components
to the game box.
reputation tile distribution
reputation tiles
combat phase
battle
starbase
dreadnought
interceptor
cruiser
ancient
gcds
combat example
Iain and Vernor are engaged in battle. Iain is the defender.
The combat begins with the plasma Missiles.
Iain will roll two orange dice for the Plasma Missiles in
each Interceptor, hitting with a roll of 6.
Vernor will roll two orange dice for the Plasma Missiles in
each Interceptor, hitting with a 6, and two orange dice for
the Plasma Missiles in the Cruiser, hitting with a 6.
The Initiative order is:
 Vernor's Interceptors
Initiative 4 (Ship default 2 + Fusion Drive 2 = 4)
 Iains Interceptors
Initiative 3 (Ship default 2 + Nuclear Drive 1 = 3; defender
first)
 Vernors Cruiser
Initiative 3 (Ship default 1 + Fusion Drive 2 = 3)
[1]: Vernor rolls 6, 6, 5, 4, 3 and 2 for the Plasma Missiles
in his Interceptors. He decides to assign the 6's to Iains
two Interceptors. The rest of the rolls are misses. Iains
Interceptors both receive two points of damage from the
Plasma Missile and are destroyed. Vernor takes the Ships
and puts them next to his Player Board.
[2]: Iain rolls 6 and 6 for the Plasma Missiles in his remaining
Interceptor. He assigns one 6 to one of the Interceptors
and the other 6 to the Cruiser. Vernors Interceptor
receives two points of damage and is destroyed. Iain
takes the Ship and puts it next to his Player Board. Vernors
Cruiser receives two points of damage, which is not
enough to destroy it. Vernor places two damage markers
next to the Cruiser.
[3]: Vernor then rolls 3 and 2 for the Plasma Missiles in his
Cruiser, which result in misses.
The battle continues with engagement rounds.
Iain now has one Interceptor and one Cruiser left. Vernor
has two Interceptors and one Cruiser.
In the combat, Iain's Interceptor attacks with one yellow
die that hits either type of Vernors Ships with a roll of
6. Iains Cruiser attacks with two yellow dice, hitting Vernors
Interceptors (which have no shields) with a roll of 4
or higher, and Vernors Cruiser with a roll of 5 or higher
(Gauss Shield substracts 1 from each die assigned to it).
Vernor will roll one yellow die for the Ion Cannon in each
Interceptor, hitting either of Iains Ships with a roll of 6,
and one orange die for the Plasma Cannon in the Cruiser,
hitting either Ship with a roll of 6.
iain
vernor
The Initiative order is:
 Vernor's Interceptors
Initiative 4 (Ship default 2 + Fusion Drive 2 = 4)
 Iain's Interceptor
Initiative 3 (Ship default 2 + Nuclear Drive 1 = 3; defender
first)
 Iain's Cruiser
Initiative 3 (Ship default 1 + Nuclear Drive 1 + Positron
Computer 1 = 3; defender first)
 Vernor's Cruiser
Initiative 3 (Ship default 1 + Fusion Drive 2 = 3)
[4]: Vernor decides to retreat the Interceptors, moving
them between the current hex and the hex he wants to retreat
to.
[5]: Iain attacks with his Interceptor and rolls for the Ion
Cannon: 3, a miss.
[6]: Iain attacks with his Cruiser and rolls for the Ion Cannons:
4 and 2. He assigns the 4 to one of the retreating Interceptors,
destroying it. He places the destroyed Ship next
to his Player Board. The roll of 2 is a miss.
[7]: Vernor attacks with his Cruiser and rolls for the Plasma
Cannon: 6, which he assigns to one of the Interceptors. It is
destroyed and Vernor puts it next to his Player Board.
The first Engagement round ends and next begins.
[8]: Vernors remaining Interceptor retreats, moving to the
neighbouring hex. Iain attacks with his Cruiser and rolls for
the Ion Cannons: 1 and 2, misses.
[9]: Vernor attacks with his Cruiser and rolls a 6. He assigns
it to the Cruiser, which receives two points of damage and
is destroyed. Vernor places the destroyed Ship next to his
Player Board.
[10]:The battle ends, as Iain's final Ship is destroyed. As
there are no more enemy Ships in the hex, Vernor may
now attack Iain's Population Cubes. He rolls a 6 for the Ion
Cannon in his Cruiser, destroying Iain's Money Population
Cube. The cube goes to Iain's Graveyard. As this was Iain's
last cube on the hex, he also has to remove his Influence
Disc, returning it to his Influence Track. Vernor may now
place his own Influence Disc in the hex and does so. He also
removes the Damage Cubes from his Cruiser.
Players return the destroyed Ships to each other and draw
Reputation Tiles. Iain draws a total of three tiles: one tile for
the battle, and two tiles for the two destroyed Interceptors.
He looks at them and keeps the highest one, returning the
rest to the bag. Vernor then draws five tiles: one tile for the
battle, two tiles for the two destroyed Interceptors and two
tiles for the destroyed Cruiser. Note that he only draws five
tiles, even though he destroyed three Interceptors, as the
maximum amount you may draw is five. He looks at the
tiles and keeps the highest one, returning the rest to the
bag.
All battles have been resolved, so Combat Phase ends and
Upkeep Phase begins.

combat phase
upkeep phase
Colony Ships First, you may activate one or
more of your remaining Colony Ships (see Colony
Ships on page 8) and move Population Cubes
to hexes. Contrary to the Action Phase, you may not move
cubes to hexes containing enemy Ships.
Civilization Upkeep Collect your Income and pay your Civilization
Upkeep cost. This is done by comparing your positive
Money Income (the highest exposed number on your
Money Population Track) with your Influence Cost for that
turn (the highest exposed number on your Influence Track).
The adjust your Money Storage marker on the Storage
Track by this net amount (upwards by any excess Income
and downwards by any deficit).
bankruptcy? The Money Storage Marker may not move
below zero; if that would happen, you must trade other Resources
(Science and Materials) for Money, or give up control
of some of your sectors by removing Influence Discs
from the hexes and returning them on your Influence Track
until the Influence Cost is small enough. All Population
Cubes from these hexes are moved to their respective Population
tracks on your Player Board. Cubes from gray (wild)
squares may go on any track, and cubes from Orbitals may
go to either the Money or Science track. Note that if you
have to return Money cubes from the hex, they return to
the Money Population track, reducing the Income as well.
In the unlikely event that you do not have enough Influence
Discs to remove, your civilization has collapsed and your
game ends here. Count your score and return all your game
components to the game box.
In the example on the right, the Blue player's Income is 4
and Upkeep is 5. As the sum of these is 45 = 1, he must
pay 1 Money from his Storage. If he doesn't have Money in
the Storage, he must either trade other resources to Money
or return one Influence Disc from his hexes to the Influence
Track. Returning a disc would bring the Upkeep to 3,
which would bring the sum to 43=1. He would then add 1
Money to his Storage.
science and materials production After paying the Civilization
Upkeep cost, collect the Science and Materials
Production and move the Storage Markers on the Storage
Track accordingly. In the example on the right, Blue would
collect 6 Science and 3 Materials.
cleanup phase
Draw new Technology Tiles (according to the number of
players) from the bag and place them on their respective
places on the Supply Board.
Each player moves all the Influence Discs from his Action
Track back to his Influence Track and all cubes (if any) from the
Graveyards to the respective Population Tracks. If a Population
Track is full, the cube must be moved to an another track.
Then each player flips all his Colony Ships face up and the
Summary Card the Action overview side up. Move the
Round Marker one step forward. A new round begins with
the Action Phase.
Trade At any time, you
may convert 2 units of
one Resource (Money, Science or
Materials) to 1 unit of any other.
Note that only Terrans have a 2:1
Trade rate. The rate depends on
the species you play.
new tech Tiles
2 players: 4
3 players: 6
4 players: 7
5 players: 8
6 players: 9
upkeep phase cleanup phase
GAME END:
The game ends after the 9th round. The player with the
most Victory Points is the winner.
Victory Points are gained from:
 Reputation Tiles (14 VP per tile)
 Ambassador Tiles (1 VP per tile)
 Hexes with an Influence Disc (14 VP per hex)
 Discovery Tiles (2 VP per tile that was kept VP side up)
 Monoliths on own hexes (3 VP per Monolith)
 Progress on the Technology Tracks:
4 Technology Tiles on a track = 1 VP,
5 tiles = 2 VP, 6 tiles = 3 VP, 7 tiles = 5 VP
 Traitor Card (2 VP!)
 Species bonuses
In case of a tie, the total amount of Resources (Money,
Science and Materials) in each tied players Storage is the
tie breaker.
two player game
The two player game is strategically slightly different from
the multiplayer game. Players should also be advised that
the Descendants and Planta benefit from their species-specific
fast expansion capabilities and are thus stronger than
other species in a two-player setting. It is recommended
not to use these species in a two player game.
two players game end
alien species
Epsilon Eridani, the capital system of
the Empire in its heyday, was a sight
yet unrivalled: whole moons  some
records claim even planets  were
shaped to celebrate the might and
wisdom of the Forever Emperor.
Their wealth was beyond anything
ever documented. Yet, after surviving
through what they call the Silent
Era, the Empire has been reduced to
rubble. The resources of the capital
system have been depleted and most
of their power disintegrated, yet the
Heirs have not given up hope. The
new dawn may rise in the uncharted
systems.
Never satisfied, never complete  the
Progress are ever striving further. The
Hydrans have long since embraced
technology as their main interest,
constantly evolving and augmenting
their society and even themselves
with new inventions. The speed of
their technological progress is unparalleled
among the Seven. Although
very difficult to access by the layman,
the universities and laboratories of
Beta Hydri are held in very high esteem
by the scientists species-wide.
Even though they are by far the most
different species of the Seven, the
Planta have long been a steady Council
member. Being a moss-like species
with a distributed sentience, their
intentions are sometimes difficult to
decipher. After overgrowing most of
the planets and moons in the Cygnus
system, they seem to be content in
just expanding their lush growth in
new systems, fully co-operating with
the other species, who mostly regard
them as harmless companions. The
Planta are phenomenal navigators,
which makes them very respected in
interspecies trading vessels.
Excerpts from the Archive of History, Library of the Galactic Center
Trade rate 3 : 1
Starting Storage:
Starting Sector number
Draws two random Reputation
Tiles in the beginning of the game
Two Influence Discs less (leave two rightmost
Influence Track circles empty)
Different Ship blueprints
Initial Technologies: Gauss Shield, Fusion
Drive, Plasma Cannon
Initial Technologies: Advanced Labs
Different Ship blueprints
Initial Technologies: Starbase
With the Move action may move
up to two Ships, or one Ship twice
With the Move action may move
up to two Ships, or one Ship twice
During game setup, also place a Population
Cube in the Advanced Science Population
Square on the Starting System
With the Move action may move
up to two Ships, or one Ship twice
With the Research action may
buy two Technologies
With the Explore action may explore
two hexes, one after another
1 extra VP for each controlled
hex at the end of the game
difference from terrans
222
Trade rate 3 : 1
Starting Storage:
224 Starting Sector number
Trade rate 3 : 1
Starting Storage:
226 Starting Sector number
Population Cubes are automatically
destroyed by an enemy Ship at the
end of the Combat Phase
Four Colony Ships
Reputation Track
Reputation Track
Reputation Track
eridani empire
hydran progress
planta

species' abilities The species' abilities
are marked on the Player Boards
with the symbols below.
The Descendants are rumoured to be
directly related to the Ancients. While
there is no concrete proof on this, the
statistics show that the survival ratio in
the Descendant-Ancient contact is significantly
higher for the Descendants
than the other Seven. Hailing from the
Draco system, the Descendants are a
somewhat elusive species. While they
are a fully recognized member of the
Galactic Council, their Ambassadors
still often cause discomfort among the
other species.
After a long and difficult process,
the Mechanema have only recently
been accepted as a full member of
the Council. Although they have been
proven sentient in every legal way
defined by the other Seven, and the
Auriga system has been assigned as
their sovereignty by the Council, there
are still occasional disputes on the
matter. The birth of the species dates
back in the early days of the Galactic
Center, when the artificial intelligences
of various species were allowed to
integrate. The Mechanema are quite
respected for their technological advancements
 in fact, the basic Ship
types now commonly used among the
spacefaring races were originally designed
by them.
The Hegemony originally hails from
the Orion system, but their fleets are
known to have actively patrolled the
general volume since the early times.
The tragedy that fell upon the Terran
Federation Dreadnought "Juri Gagarin"
and its accompanying fleet may
well have been due to a grave misunderstanding
in interspecies communication
 plausible enough in a
mutual First Contact. The long war
that followed and their seemingly
overwhelming military power gave
the Hegemony their commonly used
name. After the peace was established
and the interspecies collaboration
took its first steps with the creation of
the original Galactic Center, the Hegemony
has now been recognized as a
benevolent species, and their past as
a ruthlessly efficient war machine has
been reduced to a historical side note.
Trade rate 3 : 1
Starting Storage:
Starting Sector number
Initial Technologies: Positron Computer
Cheaper Building costs
Different Ship blueprints
Initial Technologies: Neutron Bombs, Gauss
Shield
With the Move action may move
up to two Ships, or one Ship twice
With the Move action may move
up to two Ships, or one Ship twice
With the Move action may move
up to two Ships, or one Ship twice
May have Ships in hexes containing
Ancients, but may not battle
the Ancients; may place Influence
Discs in those hexes; may not
collect Discovery Tiles from hexes
containing Ancients.
Starts with a Cruiser instead of an
Interceptor
With the Upgrade action, may
take up to 3 Ship Part Tiles from
the Supply Board
With the Build action, may build
up to three Ships or Structures
With the Explore action may
turn 2 hexes and choose one, or
discard both
1 VP per Ancient Ship left on
the game board at the end of
the game
difference from terrans
228
Trade rate 3 : 1
Starting Storage:
230 Starting Sector number
Trade rate 4 : 1
Starting Storage:
232 Starting Sector number
Reputation Track
Reputation Track
Reputation Track
descendants of draco
mechanema
orion hegemony

The Directorate governs the Procyon sector with
a strong hand. A seat in the Inner Circle is only
given to the very best, carefully chosen (and
rumouredly even genetically programmed) to
continue the line of the Directors. While there
may be power struggles behind the scenes, the
Directorate is determined to lead the rather
well-off civilization toward a great future.
Terran Federation consists of numerous state
systems with relatively similar ideals and histories.
The Altair system is considered to be the
most important of them, and it houses the Federal
Parliament. The state systems enjoy quite a
lot of freedom in their government, but in time
of need they work efficiently together to protect
the Federation.
Although the species is still known as the Terrans, its different factions have long
since left their home system and now call new, distant systems their home. After
the wormhole drive technology was discovered, the six main factions set out to
colonize the nearby systems, leaving the ruined and dying home planet behind.
The Terrans have proven to be a surprisingly adaptable and versatile species. After
surviving the near-disastrous First Contact and the subsequent war with the species
they named the Hegemony, they have made rather steady development and
are now more or less unanimously regarded as a reliable member of the Galactic
Council. The main drawback of the Terran society, and probably the reason prohibiting
them to rise to true greatness, is their inherent need to squabble and form
miniature factions amongst themselves.
After the long diaspora, the Terran Union settled
in the Eta Cassiopeiae system. Despite occasional
internal struggles, the Union has stood
tall during hard times, often through strong diplomatic
efforts and by staying carefully neutral.
This may soon change, however, as the home
system will not be able to provide for the whole
civilization..
After having set their home in the Sirius system
and doing their part in the Hegemony war, the
people of the Terran Republic have built a democratically
ruled society, enjoying a relatively
stable and prosperous life.
terran factions
terran directorate terran federation
terran union terran republic
species

Unlike the other Terran factions, the Conglomerate
was originally fully backed by corporations
eager to invest in the deep space colonies. This
is still reflected in the society all the way from
the Board, the highest governmental body of
the Conglomerate, to the most mundane details
of life in the Tau Ceti system. The Conglomerate
is a financial powerhouse and one of the key
players in the Galactic Center business.
There are no reliable documents regarding the seclusion of the
Ancients. Most theories are based on the relics found in the
systems believed to have been colonized by them. Some of the
discoveries possess qualities previously unknown in the Galactic
Library, but there is no solid theory on who or what the Ancients
were, nor where they disappeared. Interestingly enough,
folk tales of several different species allude to a similar, old
evil. Recent messages from various sectors report of multiple
contacts with something described as "Ships unlike any known
design, with an unsettling feeling of Something hovering outside
your field of vision" (Interceptor "Delirium of Disorder",
Lambda Serpentis system, 43.393)
Established at the end of the TerranHegemony War (30.027
33.364), the awkwardly named Galactic Center has since become
the contact hub of known spacefaring species. Evolved
around the diplomatic Ships that negotiated the peace (Terran
Interceptor "Shelter from the Storm" and Hegemony Dreadnought
"Viewpoint Adjustment"), the conglomerate of Ships
and habitats is now the home for billions of entities, housing
both the Galactic Council and the Library of the Galactic Center.
The Council has representatives from the major species known
colloquially as the Seven. While the Galactic Center acknowledges
all the lesser spacefaring species as equals, only the
Seven have a formal position in the Council. The minor species
do occasionally play their part in the Council power struggles.
Even in times of fledgling peace, when alliances shatter and
hasty diplomatic treaties are made, the Galactic Center is considered
a demilitarized zone and protected by heavy defenses.
The Alliance was a major force in the Terran-Hegemony
War, after the already dissolving faction united
against the common enemy. After the decisive
victory in the Battle of Delta Pavonis (33.142) and
driving the Hegemony fleet out of the sector, the Alliance
made Delta Pavonis their home system. They
have come a long way since then, but the old treaties
are still in effect and the Alliance holds strong.

FAQ:
Q: Where can I get more Resources?
A: Place Influence Discs on sector hexes and use Colony
Ships to move your Population Cubes on the Population
Squares. Research the Advanced Technologies to be able to
use the Advanced Population Squares. Build Orbitals to get
more Population Squares. Collect Discovery Tiles.
Q: What do I need Money for?
A: You need Money to pay for the Upkeep of your civilization.
The more actions you take and more sectors you control,
the more you have to pay each round.
Q: That's all?
A: Yes. Well, you can also trade Money for other Resources,
and vice versa.
Q: I don't have enough Influence Discs to do everything I
want to. What now?
A: You can use the Influence action to return up to two discs
from the sector hexes to your Influence Track. You can also
research Advanced Robotics and Quantum Grid Technologies,
which give you more discs. Finally, you often can deliberately
bankrupt your civilization, by using more discs than
you can pay for in the Upkeep Phase, and thus be required
to return some of the discs from the sectors to your Influence
Track.
Q: The best Technologies are terribly expensive. How can
I ever afford them?
A: Having Technologies of the same category increases the
discount you get when buying more. If you buy the Technologies
in increasing price order, you get the maximum
benefit of the discounts.
Q: What is the benefit of being the first player?
A: You get the first pick on the researching Technologies
and exploring empty areas. You also often get to be the first
player in a contested hex, giving you the edge on Initiative
ties.
Q: What happens if I cannot return a Population cube to
a track because it is full? This might occur if I return cubes
from gray squares to different tracks than where they
originally came from.
A: The track may be filled completely, so that no number is
visible. This means that you do not have any production of
that Resource. If a track is full and you still need to return
cubes to it, the cubes must go to any other track(s).
Q: What happens if the extra Influence Discs acquired
through the Advanced Robotics and Quantum Grid Technologies
do not fit on the Influence Track?
A: Stack the extra discs on top of the disc on the rightmost
space of the Influence Track. You may use these extra discs
normally.
Q: Using the Influence action, I can move an Influence Disc
from a hex to its neighbor through a Wormhole connection.
May I move the Disc that created this connection in
the first place?
A: No. If you move the disc, there is no longer a connection.
Q: During Upkeep Phase, when may I remove Influence
Discs from my hexes?
A: Only when you do not have enough Money (produced in
this Upkeep, plus your Storage) to pay for the Upkeep. Then
you may remove Discs until the Upkeep cost is low enough.
Note that if you remove a disc from a hex, the Population
cubes are immediately returned to your Production tracks,
which may also reduce your Money production.
Q: Is it ever possible to voluntarily remove population
cubes from the board without giving up the control of the
entire hex?
A: No. It can be done with the Influence action, though, by
first removing the disc and the cubes from the hex and then
returning the disc back to the hex.
Q: My precious ships keep getting blown to pieces. How
can I win more battles?
A: You have an advantage if you get to shoot first, cannot be
hit or can take some beating. Buy better Drives and Computers
to increase your Initiative, and Missiles to attack
before the close range combat. Buy Shields to render the
opponent's Computers useless. Buy Hull parts to withstand
more hits. Collect Discovery Tiles to get unique, powerful
Ship Parts.
Q: Aren't Interceptors too small to be of any use?
A: Not really. For example, try upgrading them with a better
energy source and they can pack quite a punch. They often
work best when specialized somehow.
Q: Are the Shields of any use if my opponents don't have
Computers?
A: No. Then again, if they don't have Computers, they most
likely won't hit you anyway. Use that to your advantage.
Q: If I have the Gluon Computer Technology, can I take
Positron Computer Ship Parts?
A: No. Each Ship Part (apart from the default ones, ie. Ion
Cannon, Nuclear Drive, Nuclear Source, Hull and Electron
Computer) requires its own Technology.
Q: If all of my ships try to retreat but are all destroyed
while doing so, do I get the Reputation Tile for taking part
in a battle?
A: No. Your ships are considered to have retreated as soon
as you decide to retreat them.
Q: If the Ancient Ships are destroyed from a Descendants
controlled hex but the Descendants still control the hex,
can they take the Discovery Tile?
A: The Discovery Tiles can only be taken when placing an
Influence Disc. So you'll first have to remove the disc with
the Influence action and then place it again.
Q: Do I have to use the Descendants' or Planta's Explore
ability? If not, when may I choose whether to use it or
not?
A: You don't have to draw two hexes with the Descendants,
or Explore two times with Planta. You can decide after seeing
the first hex.

military Technologies
Neutron Bombs You may destroy all
the Population Cubes from the hex
without rolling any dice.
Phase Shield You may
Upgrade phase shield
Ship Parts.
Starbase You may Build
Starbases.
Advanced Mining You may
place Population Cubes in the
advanced Materials squares
with your Colony Ships.
Tachyon Source You may
Upgrade tachyon source
Ship Parts.
Plasma Cannon You may
Upgrade Plasma Cannon
Ship Parts.
Plasma Missile You may
Upgrade Plasma missile
Ship Parts.
Gluon Computer You may
Upgrade gluon computer
Ship Parts.
Gauss Shield You may
Upgrade gauss shield
Ship Parts.
Positron Computer You may
Upgrade positron computer
Ship Parts.
Improved Hull You may
Upgrade improved hull
Ship Parts.
Advanced Economy You may place
Population Cubes in the
advanced Money squares with
your Colony Ships.
Antimatter Cannon You may
Upgrade antimatter cannon
Ship Parts.
Fusion Source You may
Upgrade fusion source
Ship Parts.
Tachyon Drive You may
Upgrade tachyon drive
Ship Parts.
Quantum Grid You receive two
additional Influence Discs, placed
immediately on your Influence Track.
Nanorobots You may Build one
additional Ship or Structure.
Orbital You may Build
Orbitals.
Fusion Drive You may
Upgrade fusion drive
Ship Parts.
Advanced Labs You may place
Population Cubes in the
advanced Science squares with
your Colony Ships.
Artifact Key You must take
5 Resources of one type for
each Artifact on your hexes.
Advanced Robotics You receive one
additional Influence Disc, placed
immediately on your Influence Track.
Monolith You may Build
Monoliths.
Wormhole Generator You may
Explore, Influence and Move through
a hex edge that has a Wormhole on
just one side.
grid Technologies nano Technologies
>6
preparations
Technology Tiles on Supply Board
Players
Outer Sector hex stack
Players
game end scoring
Reputation Tiles
14 VP per tile
Ambassador Tiles
1 VP per tile
Hexes controlled
14 VP per hex
Discovery Tiles
2 VP per tile
Monoliths on controlled hexes
3 VP per Monolith
Progress on Technology Track
4 tiles on a track = 1 VP
5 tiles = 2 VP
6 tiles = 3 VP
7 tiles = 5 VP
Traitor Card
2 VP
Species bonuses
action phase
Starting from start player and going clockwise: take an Action or Pass
xp Explore  place a hex next to a hex where you have a disc or a Ship, may discard
n Influence  move Influence Discs and flip Colony Ships face up
rs Research  take a Technology, pay Science
upg Upgrade  discard and take Ship Parts
bu Build  build Ships or Structures in hexes where you have a disc, pay Materials
mov Move  move Ships; may move same or different
At any time during action, you may use Colony Ships
Turn Summary Card dark side up when passing
After passing, you may only do Reactions ( mov, bu or upg  weaker actions)
combat phase
Resolve battles in descending hex order
Score of 6 or more is a hit; a roll of 6 is always a hit, roll of 1 is always a miss
If a hex contains more than two sides, battles resolved in reversed entry order
GCDS, Ancients and player controlling the hex always battle last
Draw Reputation Tiles (max 5) once per hex, keep one, placed on track
1 Tile for taking part in a battle (not if your last Ships retreated)
1 Tile for each opposing Interceptor, Starbase & Ancient destroyed
2 Tiles for each opposing Cruiser destroyed
3 Tiles for each opposing Dreadnought destroyed
3 Tiles for the Galactic Center Defense destroyed
upkeep phase
May use remaining Colony Ships
Pay Upkeep and receive Production
cleanup phase
Return Influence Discs from Action Track to Influence Track
Draw new Technology Tiles from bag
